well thank you all very much for coming
it's really shocking to me that you
don't have anything better to do one of
these days
no seriously though it is I mean you
know it's it's very strange in some
sense that there's so many of you here
to listen to a sequence of site of
lectures on the psychological
significance of the biblical stories it
isn't something I've wanted to do for a
long time but it still does surprise me
that there's a ready audience for it and
well alright so that's good so we'll see
how it goes
and I'll start with this because this is
the right question that the right
question is why bother doing this and I
don't mean why should I bother doing it
I have my own reasons for doing it but
you might think well why bother with
this strange old book at all and that's
a good question you know it's a
contradictory document that's being
cobbled together over thousands of years
it's outlasted kingdoms many many
kingdoms you know it's really
interesting that turns out that a book
is more durable than than a stone it's
more durable than a castle it's more
durable than an empire and that's really
interesting you know that it's something
in some sense so evanescent can be so
long living so there's that that's kind
of a mystery I'm I'm approaching this
whole scenario is the biblical stories
as if they're a mystery fundamentally
because they are there's a lot we don't
understand about them and we don't
understand how they came about we don't
really understand how they were put
together we don't understand why they
had such an unbelievable impact on
civilization we don't understand how
people could have believed them we don't
understand what it means that we don't
believe them now or or even what it
would mean if we didn't believe them
there
and then on top of all that there's the
additional problem which isn't specific
to me but it's certainly relevant to me
that no matter how educated you are
you're not educated enough to discuss
the psychological significance of the
biblical stories but I'm going to do my
best and partly because I want to learn
more about them and one of the things I
learned is that the best way to learn
about something is to talk about it and
when I'm lecturing I'm thinking you know
I'm not trying to tell you what I know
for sure to be the case because there's
lots of things I don't know for sure to
be the case I'm trying to make sense out
of this and I have been doing this for a
long time you know you know you may know
you may not that I'm an admirer of
Nietzsche Nietzsche was a devastating
critic of I would say dogmatic
Christianity Christianity as it was
instantiated in institutions I suppose
although he's a very paradoxical thinker
because for example one of the things
Nietzsche said was that he didn't
believe that the scientific revolution
would have ever got off the ground if it
hadn't been for Christianity and more
specifically for Catholicism because he
believed that over the course of really
a thousand years the European mind so to
speak had to train itself to interpret
everything that was known within a
single coherent framework coherent with
you except the initial axioms a single
coherent framework and so Nietzsche
believed that that Catholicism of the
phenomena of life and of history
produced the kind of mind that was then
capable of transcending that its
dogmatic foundations and then
concentrating on something else which in
this particular case happened to be the
natural world and so Nietzsche believed
that in some sense Christianity died at
its own hand it had spent a very long
period of time trying to attune people
to the necessity of the truth you know
absent the corruption and all about
that's always part of any human endeavor
and then the truth the spirit of the
truth that was developed by Christianity
turned on the roots of Christianity and
everyone woke up and said something like
or thought something like well how is it
that we came to believe any of this it's
like waking up one day and noting noting
that you really don't know why you put a
Christmas tree up but you've been doing
it for a long time and that's what
people do and you know there are reasons
that Christmas trees came about but the
what would you say the ritual lasts long
after the reasons have been forgotten
so now Nietzsche although he was a
critic of Christianity and also a
champion of its disciplinary capacity
because you see the other thing that
Nietzsche believed was that it was not
possible to be free in some sense unless
you go unless you had been a slave and
by that he meant that you don't go from
childhood to full-fledged adult
individuality you go from childhood to a
state of discipline which you might
think is akin to slavery to self-imposed
slavery that that would be the best
scenario where you have to discipline
yourself to become something specific
before you might be able to retain the
generality that you had as a child and
he believed that Christianity had played
that role for Western civilization but
in the late 1800s he announced that God
was dead and you often hear of that of
something triumphant but for Nietzsche
it wasn't because he was too nuanced to
think er to be that simple-minded see
Nietzsche understood that this is
something I'm going to try to make clear
is that we there's a very large amount
that we don't know about the structure
of experience that we don't know about
reality and we have our articulated
representations of the world and then
you could think of outside of that there
are things we know absolutely nothing
about and there's
offer between them and those are things
we sort of know something about and we
don't know them in an articulated way
here's an example you know sometimes
you're arguing with one of your someone
close to you and they're in a bad mood
you know and they're being touchy and
unreasonable and you keep the
conversation up and maybe all of a
sudden they you know they get angry
maybe they cry and then when they cry
they figure out what they're angry about
and it has nothing to do with you even
though you might have been what
precipitated the argument no one that's
an interesting phenomena as far as I'm
concerned because it means that people
can know things at one level without
being able to speak what they know at
another so in some sense the thoughts
rise up from the body and they do that
in moods and they do that in images and
they do that in actions and we have all
sorts of ways that we understand before
we understand in a fully articulated
manner and so we have this articulated
space that we can all discuss and then
outside of that we have something that's
more akin to a dream that were embedded
in and it's an emotional dream that were
embedded in and that's based at least in
part on our actions I'll describe that
later and then outside of that is what
we don't know anything about at all and
in that dream that's where the Mystics
live and that's where the artists live
and there are the mediators between the
absolute unknown and the things we know
for sure and you see what that means in
some sense is what we know is
established on a form of knowledge that
we don't really understand and that if
those two things are out of sync so you
might say if our articulated knowledge
is out of sync with our dream then we
become dissociated internally we think
things we don't act out and we act out
things we don't dream and that produces
a kind of sickness of the Spirit and and
that sickness of the Spirit it see its
cure is something like an integrated
system of belief and representation and
then people turn to things like
ideologies which I regard as parasites
on an underlying religious sub structure
to try to organize their thinking and
then that's a catastrophe and that's
what Nietzsche Nietzsche foresaw you see
he knew that when we knocked the slaps
out of the base of
civilization by destroying this
representation is this God ideal let's
say that we would destabilize and move
back and forth violently between
nihilism let's say and the extremes of
ideologies he was particularly concerned
about radical left ideology you know one
believed and predicted this in the late
1800s which is really an absolute
intellectual tour-de-force of staggering
magnitude predicted that in the 20th
century that hundreds of millions of
people would die because of the
replacement of these underlying
dreamlike structures with this rational
rational but deeply incorrect
representation of the world and you know
we've been oscillating back and forth
between left and right in some sense
ever since and you know with some good
sprinkling of nihilism in there and
despair some sense that's the situation
of the modern Western person and
increasingly of people in general you
know I think part of the reason that
Islam has its back up with regards to
the West to such a degree there's many
reasons and not all of them are valid
that's for sure but one of the reasons
is that you know they being still
grounded in a in a in a dream let's say
they can see that the rootless
questioning mind of the West poses a
tremendous danger to the integrity of
their culture now and it does I mean
Westerners us we undermine ourselves all
the time with our searching intellect
and I'm not complaining about passeth
you know I mean it
there isn't anything easy that can be
done about it but but it's still it's
still a sort of fruitful catastrophe and
you know it has real effects on people's
lives it's not some abstract thing you
know in me lots of times when I've been
treating people for depression for
example or anxiety they have existential
issues you know it's not just some
psychiatric condition it's it's not just
that they're tapped off of normal
because their brain chemistry is faulty
although you know sometimes that happens
to be the case it's that they are
overwhelmed by the suffering and
complexity of their life and they're not
sure why it's reasonable to continue
with it you know they can feel the
terrible negative meaning
of life but are skeptical beyond belief
about any of the positive meanings I had
one client was a very brilliant artist
and as long as he didn't think he was
fine you know because he don't create
and who is really good at being an
artist he just you know he had that
personality that was continually
creative and quite brilliant although he
was self denigrating and but as soon as
he started to think about what he was
doing then you know that the what was
it's like a like a drill or saw or
something like that he saw the branch
off that he was sitting on because he'd
start to criticize what he was doing
even the utility of it even though it
was sort of self evidently useful and
then he would be and it would be very
very hard for him to even motivate
himself to create and he always struck
me as a good example of of the
consequences of having your rational
intellect divorced in some way from your
being divorced enough so that it
actually questions the utility of your
being and it's not a good thing it's not
a good thing and it's really not a good
thing because it manifests itself not
only an individual psychopathology but
also in social psychopathology and
that's this proclivity of people to get
tangled up in ideologies which which I
really do think of as as they're like
they're like crippled religions that's
the right way to think about them
they're like religion that's missing an
arm and a leg but can still hobble along
and it it provides a certain amount of
security and group identity but it's
it's warped and twisted and demented and
Banten it's a parasite on something
underlying that's rich and true and
that's how it looks to me anyways and
and so so I think it's very important
that we sort out this problem I think
that I think that there isn't anything
more important that needs to be done
than that I've thought that for a long
long time probably since the early 80s
when I started looking at the psyche the
role that belief systems played in
regulating psychological and social
health because you can tell that they do
that because of how upset people get if
you challenge their beliefs
it's like why the hell do they care
exactly what difference does it make if
if all of your ideological axioms are a
hundred percent correct like people get
unbelievably upset when you when you
poke them in the axioms so to speak and
it isn't it is not by any stretch of the
imagination obvious why you know but
there's some it's like there's a
fundamental truth that they're standing
on it's it's like they're on the raft in
the middle of the ocean and you're
starting to pull out the logs you know
and they're afraid they're going to fall
in and drown
it's like drowning what and what are the
logs protecting themselves protecting
them from and why are they so afraid to
to move beyond the confines of the
ideological system and these are not
obvious things so I've been trying to
puzzle that out for a very long time and
I've done some lectures about data that
are on YouTube most of you know that and
some of what I'm going to talk about in
this series you'll have heard if you've
listened to the YouTube videos but you
know I'm trying to hit it from different
angles and so okay so Nietzsche's idea
was that human beings were going to have
to create their own values essentially
now he understood that we have bodies
and that we had motivations and emotions
like he was a romantic thinker in some
sense but way ahead of his time because
he knew that our capacity to think
wasn't some free-floating soul but was
embedded in our physiology constrained
by our emotion shaped by our motivation
shaped by our body he understood that
but he still believed that the only
possible way out of the problem would be
for human beings themselves to become
something akin to God and to create
their own values that was steps and he
thought that the person he talked about
the person who could create their own
values as the over man or the Superman
and that was one of the parts of
Nietzsche and philosophy that the Nazis
I would say took out of context used to
fuel their you know superior man
ideology so as we know what happened
with that that didn't seem to turn out
very well that's for sure and see I also
spent a lot of time reading Carl Jung it
was through Jung and also John Piaget
developmental psychologists that I
started to understand
and that our articulated systems of
thought are embedded in something like a
dream and that that dream is informed in
a complex way by the way we act so you
know me we act out things we don't
understand all the time and if that
wasn't the case then we wouldn't need a
psychology or a sociology or
anthropology or any of that because we
would be completely transparent to
ourselves and we're clearly not so we're
much more complicated than we understand
which means that the way that we behave
contains way more information than we
know and part of the dream that
surrounds our articulated knowledge has
been extracted as a consequence of us
watching each other behave and telling
stories about it for thousands and
thousands and thousands of years
extracting out patterns of behavior that
characterized humanity and trying to
represent them partly through limitation
but also through drama and mythology and
literature and arc and all of that to
represent what we're like so that we can
understand what we're like and that
process of understanding is what I see
unfolding at least in part in the
biblical stories and it's it's halting
and partial and awkward and
contradictory and and all of that which
is one of the things that makes the book
so complex but I see in it the struggle
of humanity to arise to rise above its
animal forebears say and to become
conscious of what it means to be human
and that's a very difficult thing
because we don't know who we are what we
are where we came from or any of those
things and you know the white life is an
unbroken chain going back three and a
half billion years it's an absolutely
unbelievable thing every single one of
your ancestors reproduced successfully
for three-and-a-half billion years it's
absolutely unbelievable we rose out of
the dirt in the muck and here we are
conscious but not knowing and we're
trying to figure out who we are and a
story that we've been telling her a set
of stories that we've been telling for
three thousand years seems to me to have
something to offer and so when when I
look at the stories in the Bible I do it
I would say in some sense with the
beginner's mind it's a mystery this book
how the hell it was made why it was made
why we preserved
how it happened to motivate an entire
culture for 2,000 years and to transform
the world like what's going on how did
that happen it's by no means obvious and
one of the things that bothers me about
casual critics of religion is that they
don't take the phenomena seriously and
it's a serious phenomenon I mean not
least because people have the capacity
for religious experience and no one
knows why that is and I mean you can
induce it reliably in all sorts of
different ways you could do it with
brain stimulation you could certainly do
it with drugs
there's especially the psychedelic
variety they produce intimations of the
divine extraordinarily regularly people
have been using drugs like that for god
only knows how long 50,000 years maybe
more than that to produce some sort of
intimate union with the divine it's like
we don't understand any of that when we
discovered the psychedelics in the late
60s it shocked everybody so badly that
they're instantly made illegal and
abandoned in terms of research for like
50 years and it's no wonder because who
the hell expected that nobody now now
Young was the student of Nietzsche's you
see him he was also I would say at the
very critic of Nietzsche he was educated
by Freud and Freud Freud I suppose in
some sense started to callate collate
the information that we had pertaining
to the notion that people lived inside a
dream you know it was Freud who really
popularized the idea of the unconscious
mind and we take this for granted to
such a degree today that we don't
understand how revolutionary the idea
was like with what's happened with Freud
is that we've taken all the marrow out
of his bones so to speak unless the husk
behind and you know now when we think
about Freud we just think about the husk
because that's everything that's being
discarded but so much of what he
discovered is part of our popular
conception now including the idea that
your perceptions and your actions and
your thoughts are all what would you say
informed and and shaped by unconscious
motivations that are not part of your
voluntary control and that's a very very
strange thing it's one of the most
unsettling things about the
psychoanalytic theories
so analytic theories are something like
your a loose collection of living
subpersonalities each with its own set
of motivations and perceptions and
emotions and rationales all of that and
you have limited control over that so
you're like a plurality of of internal
personalities that's loosely linked into
a unity you know that because you can't
control yourself very well which is one
of unions objections to needs his idea
that we could create our own values so
you didn't believe that especially not
after interacting with Freud because he
saw that human beings were affected by
things that were deeply deeply affected
by things that were beyond their
conscious control and no one really
knows how to conceptualize those things
you know the cognitive psychologists
think about them in some sense as
computational machines and the ancient
people I think thought of them as gods
although it's more complex than that
like rage would be of God Mars the
regard of rage that's the thing that
possesses you when you're angry you know
it has a viewpoint in it it says what it
wants to say and that might have very
little to do with what you want to say
when you're being sensible and it
doesn't just inhabit you it didn't
habits everyone and it lives forever and
it even inhabits animals and so it's
this transcendent psychological entity
that inhabits the body politic like like
the thought inhabits the brain that's
one way of thinking about it it's a very
strange way of thinking but it certainly
it certainly has its merit and so and
those things well in some sense those
are deities although it's not that
simple and so you feel was what got very
interested in dreams that started to
understand the relationship between
dreams and myths because he would see in
his clients dreams echoes of stories
that he knew because it was deeply read
in mythology and then he started to
believe that the dream was the
birthplace of the myth and that there
was a continual interaction between the
two processes the dream and the story
and storytelling and well you know you
tend to tell your dreams as stories when
you remember them and some people
remember dreams all the time like two or
three at night I've had clients like
that and they often have archetypal
dreams that have very clear mythological
structures
I think that's more the case with people
who are creative by the way especially
if they're a bit unstable at the time
because the dream tends to occupy the
space of uncertainty and to concentrate
on fleshing out the unknown reality
before you get a real grip on it so it's
like the dream is the birthplace of
thinking that's a good way of thinking
about it and so because it's the
birthplace of thinking it's not that
clear it's doing its best to formulate
something that was Jung's notion as
opposed to Freud who believed that there
were sensors internal sensors that were
hiding the dreams true message that's
not what you believed he believed the
dream was doing its best to express a
reality that was still outside of fully
articulated conscious comprehension it
was as you think look a thought appears
in your head right that's obvious spit
bang it's nothing you ever asked about
but what the hell does that mean a
thought appears in your head what kind
of ridiculous explanation is that you
know it just doesn't help with anything
where does it come from
well nowhere it just appears in my head
okay well that's not a very
sophisticated explanation as it turns
out you know and so you might think that
those thoughts thoughts that you think
well where do they come from well
they're often someone else's thoughts
right someone long-dead that might be
part of it just like the words you use
to think our utterances of people who be
long dead and so you're informed by the
spirit of your ancestors that's one way
of looking at it and your motivation
speak to your emotions speak to and your
body speaks to you and it all does all
that at least in part through the dream
and the dream is the birthplace of the
fully articulated idea it'll just come
from nowhere fully fledged right they
have a development large and god only
knows how how how lengthy that origin is
even to say something like I am
conscious you know that's taken
chimpanzees don't say that you know it's
been seven million years since we broke
from chimpanzees something like that
from the common ancestor you know they
have no articulated knowledge at all
they're very little self representation
in some sense
very little self-consciousness and
that's not the case with us at all and
we had to painstakingly figure all of
this out during that you know seven
million year voyage and I think some of
that's represented in and and and
captured in some sense in these ancient
stories which I believe were part of
especially the oldest stories in Genesis
which is the stories were going to start
with it that they were that that some of
the archaic nature of the human being is
encapsulated in those stories and it's
very very instructive as far as I can
tell and give you just a quick example
you know there's an idea of sacrifice in
in in the Old Testament and it's pretty
barbaric you know I mean the story of
Abraham and Isaac there's a good example
about because Abraham was called on to
actually sacrifice his own son which
doesn't really seem like something that
a reasonable God would ask you to do
right and the God in the Old Testament
it's frequently cruel and arbitrary and
demanding and paradoxical which which is
one of the things that really gives the
book life because it wasn't edited by a
committee you know a committee that was
concerned with with not offending anyone
that's for sure so
[Applause]
so Jung believed that the dream was the
birthplace of thought and I've been
extending that idea because one of the
things I wondered about deeply was you
know you have a dream and then someone
interprets it you can argue about
whether or not an interpretation is
valid just like you can argue about
whether your interpretation of a novel
or movie is valid right it's a very
difficult thing to determine with any
degree of accuracy counts in part for
the postmodern critique but my
observation has been that people will
present a dream and sometimes we can
extract out real useful information from
it that the person didn't appear to know
you know and they get a flash of insight
and to me that's a marker that we
stumbled on something that you nice part
of that person that wasn't United before
it pulls things together which is often
what a good story will do or sometimes a
good theory you know things snap
together for you there's a little light
goes on and that's one of the markers
that I've used for accuracy and dreams
and I know in my own family when I was
first married you know I'd have fights
with my wife arguments about this and
that and I'm fairly hot-headed and so I
get all puffed up and you know agitated
about about whatever we were arguing
about and she'd go to sleep which was
really annoying and it's so annoying
because I couldn't sleep right I like
chewing off my fingernails and she'd be
like sleeping peacefully beside me is
like maddening so but often she'd have a
dream you know and then the next morning
she discuss it with me and then we could
unravel what was at the bottom of our
argument and that was unbelievably
useful even though it was
extraordinarily aggravating so so you
know I was convinced by Jung it looked
to me like his ideas about the
relationship between dreams and
mythology and drama and literature made
sense to me in the and the and the
relationship between that and art I know
this native Carver he's a Wacka Wacka
he's carved a bunch of wooden sculptures
totem poles and masks that
have in my house and he's a very
interesting person not literate not
particularly literate and really still
steeped in this ancient 13,000 year old
tradition he's an original language
speaker and the fact that he hasn't
literate has sort of left him with the
mind of someone who's preliterate and
pre literate people aren't stupid
they're just not literate so their
brains are organized differently in many
ways and I've asked him about his his
intuition for his carvings and he's told
me that he dreams like you've seen the
Haida masks you know what they look like
his people are closely related to the
Haida so it's the same kind of style
he said he dreams in those animals and
and can remember his dreams and he also
talks to his grandparents who taught him
how to carve in his dreams quite often
if he runs into a problem with carving
his grandparents will come and he'll
talk to them but he sees that the
creatures that he's going to carve
living in an animated sense in his in
his imagination and I mean it's not that
difficult first of all I have no reason
to disbelieve him he's a very very
straightforward person and he doesn't
have the motivation or the guile I would
say in some sense to invent a story like
that there's just no reason he would
possibly do it I don't think he's told
that many people about it he thinks it's
kind of crazy you know said when he was
a kid he thought he was insane because
he'd had those dreams all the time about
these creatures and so forth and so it
wasn't something he was trumpeting but I
found it fascinating because I can see
in him part of the manifestation of this
unbroken tradition we have no idea how
traditions like that are really passed
along for thousands and thousands of
years right part of its oral and memory
part of its acted out and dramatized and
then part of its going to be imaginative
and people who aren't literate they
store information quite differently than
we do we don't remember anything it's
all written down in books right but if
you're from an oral culture especially
if you're trained in that way you have
all of that information at hand both so
you can speak it you can tell the
stories and you really know them and you
know modern people don't really know
what that's like any more doubt if
there's more than maybe two of you in
the audience that could spout from
memory like a 30 line poem you know when
poetry was written so
people could do that that that's why we
have that format so that people could
remember it and have it with them we
don't do any of that anymore
anyways back to you Ewan was a great
believer in the dream and I noted that
dreams will tell you things that you
don't know and then I thought well how
the hell can that be how that in the
world can something you think up tell
you something you don't know how does
that make any sense
first of all why don't you understand it
why does it have to come forth in the
form of the dream it's like you're not
there's something going on inside you
that you don't control right the dream
happens to you just like life happens to
you I mean there is the odd lucid
dreamer who can you know apply a certain
amount of conscious control but most of
the time it's you're laying there asleep
and this crazy complicated world
manifests itself inside you and you
don't know how you could you can't do it
when you're awake and you don't know
what it means it's like what the hell is
going on and that's one of the things so
damn frightening about the psychoanalyst
because you get this both from Freud and
Jung you really start to understand that
there are things inside you that are
happening that control you instead of
the other way around you know it is a
bit of reciprocal control but there's
manifestations of spirits so to speak
inside you that determine the manner in
which you walk through life and you
don't control it and what does is it
random you know there are people who
have claimed that dreams are mirror
merely the consequence of random
neuronal firing which is a theory I
think it's absolutely absurd because
there's nothing random about dreams you
know they're very very structured and
very very complex and they're not like
snow on a television screen or static on
a radio like those things are
complicated and and then also I've seen
so often that people have very coherent
dreams that have a perfect narrative
structure now they're fully developed in
some sense and so I just denied that
theory just doesn't go anywhere with me
I just can't see that as useful at all
and so so I'm more likely to take the
phenomena seriously say well there's
something to dreams while you dream of
the future
and then you try to make it into a
reality that seems to be an important
thing
or maybe you dream up a nightmare and
try to make that into a reality because
people do that too if they're hell-bent
on revenge for example and full of
hatred and resentment that manifests
itself in terrible fantasies you know
those are dreams then people go act them
out these things are powerful you know
when whole nations can get caught up in
collective dreams that's what happened
to the Nazis that's what happened to
Nazi Germany in the 1930s it was
absolutely remarkable amazing horrific
destructive spectacle and the same thing
happened in the Soviet Union the same
thing happened in China like we have
take these things seriously you know and
try to understand what's going on so you
believe that the dream could contain
more information than was yet
articulated you think artists do the
same thing you know like people go to
museums and they look at paintings
Renaissance paintings or modern
paintings and they don't exactly know
why they're there you know I was in this
room in in New York I don't remember
which museum but it was a room full of
Renaissance art you know great painters
the greatest painters and thought maybe
that room was worth a billion dollars or
something outrageous because there was
like 20 paintings in there you know so
priceless and the first thing is well
why are those paintings worth so much
and why is there a museum in the biggest
city in the world devoted to them and
why do people from all over the world
come and look at them what the hell are
those people doing one of them was of
the Assumption of Mary you know
beautifully painted absolutely glowing
work of art and like 20 people standing
in front of it looking at it and think
what are those people up to you know
they don't know why did they make a
pilgrimage to New York to come and look
at that painting it's not like they know
why is it worth so much I mean I know
there's a status element to it too but
that begs the question why do those
items become such high status items what
is it about them that's so absolutely
remarkable
well we're strange creatures so I was
trying to figure out in part well where
did the information that's in the dream
come from it has to come from somewhere
and you could think about it as a
revelation you know because it's like it
Springs out of the void it's new
knowledge and it's a revelation you
produce if it just it just appears but
that's seeing one of the things I want
to do with this series it's like I am
scientifically minded and I'm quite a
rational person and I like to have an
explanation for things that's rational
and empirical before I look for any
other kind of explanation and I don't
want to say that everything that's
associated with divinity can be reduced
in some manner to biology or to an
evolutionary history or anything like
that but insofar as it's possible to do
that reduction I'm going to do that and
I'm going to leave the other phenomena
floating in the air because they can't
be pinned down and in that category I
would put the category of mystical or
religious experience which we don't
understand at all so artists observe one
another they observe people and they
represent what they see and they
transmit the message of what they see to
us and they teach us to see and we don't
necessarily know what it is that we're
learning from them but we're learning
something or at least we're acting like
we're learning something we go to movies
we watch stories we we immerse ourselves
in fiction constantly that's an artistic
production and for many people the world
of the arts is a living world and that's
particularly true if you're a creative
person it's the creative artistic people
that do move the knowledge of humanity
forward and they do that with their
artistic productions first they're on
the edge and the dancers do that and the
poets do that and the visual artists do
that of the musicians do that and we're
not sure what they're doing we're not
sure what musicians are doing what the
hell are they doing why do you like
music you know gives you with deep
information of the significance of
things and then no one questions it you
go to a concert you're thrilled it's a
quasi-religious experience particularly
if the people really get themselves
together and get the crowd moving you
know there's something incredibly
intense about it but makes no sense
whatsoever it's not an easy thing to
understand music is deeply patterned and
patterned in layers and I think that has
something to do with it because reality
is patterned and deeply patterned in
layers and so I think music is
representing reality in some fundamental
way and that we get into this way of
that and sort of participate in being
and that's part
what makes it such an uplifting
experience but we don't really know
that's what we're doing we just go do it
and and and and it's nourishing for
people right I mean young people in
particular that lots of them live for
music it's where they derive all their
meaning their cultural identity you have
everything that's nourishing comes from
their affiliation with their music that
is part of their cultural identity so
that's an amazing thing the question
still remains where does the information
and dreams come from and I think what
where it comes from is that we watch the
patterns that everyone acts out we've
watched that forever and we've got two
representations of those patterns that's
part of our cultural history that's
what's embedded in stories in fictional
accounts of the story between good and
evil the bad guy and the good guy and
the romance you know these are these are
canonical patterns of being for people
and they deeply affect us because they
represent what it is that we will act
out in the world and then we flesh that
out with the individual information we
have about ourselves and other people
and so it's like there's a there's a
there's waves of behavioral patterns
that manifest themselves in the crowd
across time the great dramas are played
on the crowd across time and the artists
watch that and and they get intimations
of what that is and they write it down
and they tell us and then we're a little
clearer about what we're up to you know
like a great dramatist like Shakespeare
let's say is we know that what he wrote
is fiction and then we say well fiction
isn't true but then you think well mate
a minute maybe it's true like numbers
are true you know numbers are an
abstraction from the underlying reality
but no one in their right mind would
really think numbers aren't true you
could even make a case that the numbers
are more real than the things that they
represent right that the abstraction is
so insanely powerful
once you have mathematics you're just
deadly you can move the world with
mathematics so it's not obvious that the
abstraction is less real than than the
the more concrete reality and you take a
work of fiction like Hamlet you think
well is that it's not true because it's
fiction but
you think wait a minute what kind of
explanation is that maybe it's more true
than nonfiction because it takes what
the story that needs to be told about
you and the story that needs to be told
about you and you and you and you and
extracts that out says look here's
something that's a key part of the human
experience as such right so it's an
abstraction from this underlying noisy
substrate and people are affected by it
because they see that the thing that's
represented is part of the pattern of
their being that's the right way to
think about it and then with these old
stories these ancient stories it seems
to me like that process is being
occurring for thousands of years it's
like we watched ourselves and we
extracted out some stories we imitated
each other and we represented that drama
and then we distilled the drama and we
got a representation of the distillation
and then we did it again at the end of
that process that took god only knows
how long I think some of these stories
they've traced fairy tales back ten
thousand years some fairy tales in
relatively unchanged form and it
certainly seems to me that the
archaeological evidence for example
suggests that the really old stories
that the Bible begins with are at least
that old and likely embedded in a
prehistory that's far older than that
you might think well how can you be so
sure the answer to that in part is that
cultures that don't change like the
ancient cultures right they didn't
change as fast as they stay the same
that's the answer so they call they keep
their information moving generation to
generation that's how they stay the same
and so we know again in the
archaeological record there are records
of rituals that have remained relatively
unbroken for up to 20,000 years it was
discovered in caves in Japan that were
set up for a particular kind of bear
worship that was also characteristic of
Western Europe so these things can last
for very long periods of time we're
watching each other act in the world and
then the question is well how long have
we been watching each other and answer
that in some senses well as long as
there's being creatures with nervous
systems and that's a long time you know
that
some hundreds of millions of years
perhaps longer than that
we've been watching each other trying to
figure out what we're up to across that
entire span of time some of that
knowledge is built right into our bodies
which is why we can dance with each
other for example right because
understanding isn't just something that
you that you have as an abstraction it's
something that you act out you know
that's what children are doing when
they're learning to rough and tumble
plays they're learning to integrate
their body with the body of someone else
in a harmonious way learning to
cooperate and compete and that's all
instantiated right into their body it's
not abstract knowledge they don't know
that they're doing that they're just
doing it and so we can even use our body
as a representational platform so we've
been studying each other for a long time
abstracting out what is it that we're up
to and that's that that's what is it
we're up to what shouldn't we be up to
that's even a more fundamental question
if you're going to live in the world and
you're going to do it properly
what does properly mean and how is it
that you might go about that well it's
the right question right it's what
everyone wants to know how do you live
in the world not what is the world made
of it's not the same question how do you
live in the world it's the eternal
question of human beings and I guess
we're the only species that has ever
really asked that question because all
the other animals they just go and do
whatever they do not us it's a question
for us we've had to we have to become
aware of it we have to be able to speak
it god only knows why but that seems to
be the situation so we act that acting
is shaped by the world that acting is
shaped by society into something that we
don't understand but that we can model
that we can model we model it in our
stories we model it with our bodies and
that's where the dream gets its
information the dream is part of the
process that's watching everything and
then trying to formulate it and trying
to say well trying to get the signal out
from the noise and to portrayed in
dramatic form because it's dream is
little drama and then you get the chance
to talk about what that dream is and
then you have it you have something like
articulated knowledge at that point and
so the Bible I would say is is it's sort
of
it exists in that space that's half into
the dream and half into articulated
knowledge it's something like that and
going into it to find out what the
stories are about can what can what it
can aid our self understanding and then
the other issue is is that if nature was
correct and if Dostoyevsky or Jung was
correct in Dostoyevsky as well we
without the cornerstone that that
understanding provides were lost and
that's not good because then we're
susceptible to psychic pathology that's
psychological pathology there were
people who are adamant anti religious
thinkers seem to believe that if we
abandoned our immerse Minh tin the
underlying dream that we'd all instantly
become rationalists like Descartes or
bacon you know intelligent clear
thinking rational scientific people I
don't believe that for a moment because
I don't think there's any evidence for
it I think we would become so irrational
so rapidly that the weirdest mysteries
of Catholicism would seem positively
rational by contrast and I think that's
already happening so ok so this is the
idea essentially you know that you have
the unknown world
that's just what you don't know at all
that's that's outside that's the ocean
that surrounds the island that you
inhabit something like that it's chaos
itself and then you act in that world
and you act in ways you don't understand
there's more to your actions than you
can understand one of the things you
said I love this when I first understood
it he said everybody acts out a myth but
very few people know what their myth is
and you should know what your myth is
because it might be a tragedy and maybe
you don't want it to be and that's
really worth thinking because thinking
about because you're you have a pattern
of behavior that characterizes you you
know when god only knows where you got
it hardly it's biological partly it's
from your parents
it's your unconscious assumptions it's
the way the philosophy of your society
has shaped you and it's aimed
it's aiming you somewhere well is it
aiming you somewhere you want to go
that's a good question
that's part of self-realization you know
we know we don't understand our actions
that's almost every argument you have
with someone is about that it's like why
did you do that come up with some
half-baked reasons why you did it
you're flailing around in the darkness
you know you try to give an account for
yourself but you can only do it
partially it's very very difficult
because you're in your you're a
complicated animal with the beginnings
of an articulated mind something like
that and you're just way more than you
can handle and and all right so you act
things out right you act things out and
that's a kind of competence and then you
imagine what you act out and you imagine
what everyone else acts out and so
there's a tremendous amount of
information in your action and then that
information is translated up into the
dream and into art into mythology and
literature and there's a tremendous
amount of information in that and then
some of that is translated into
articulated thought and I'll give you a
quick example of something like that I
think this is partly what happens in
Exodus when Moses comes up with the law
you know he's wandering around with the
Israelites forever in the desert and
they're they're like going left and
going right worshipping idols and like
having a hell of a time and you know
getting rebellious and Moses goes up in
the mountain and he has this tremendous
revelation sort of in the sight of God
and illuminates him and he comes down
with the law you think well no Moses
acted as a judge I know this is a
mythological story Moses acted as a
judge in the desert he was continually
mediating between people who are having
problems constantly trying to keep peace
and so what are you doing when your turn
to keep peace is you're trying to
understand what peace is right you have
to apply the principles or what are the
principles well you don't know the
principles are whatever satisfies people
enough to make peace and maybe you do
that ten thousand times and then you get
some sense of oh here's the principles
that bring peace and then one day it
blasts into your consciousness like like
a revelation
here is the rules that we're already
acting out well that's the Ten
Commandments it's they're there to begin
with and Moses comes
and says look this is already basically
what we're doing but now it's codified
right and like that's all a historical
process that's condensed into a stay
single story but obviously that happened
because we have written law right and
that emerged in good legal systems that
emerges from the bottom up that's
English common law is exactly like that
right it's single decisions that are
predicated on principles that have been
then articulated and made into the body
of law the body of law is something you
act out that's why it's a body of law if
you're a good citizen you act out the
body of law and the body of law has
principles okay so the question is
there's principles that guide our
behavior what are those principles well
I think when you if you if you want the
initial answer of what the art archaic
Israelites meant by God that's something
like what they meant now it's not a good
enough explanation but look imagine that
you that you have a that you're a
chimpanzee you have a powerful dominant
figure at the pinnacle of your society
that represents power now more than that
because it's not sheer physical prowess
that keeps a chimp at the top of the
hierarchy it's much more complicated
than that but you could say well there's
there's a principle that the dominant
person manifests and then you might say
well that principle shines forth even
more brightly if you know ten people who
are dominant powerful then you can
extract out what dominance means from
that you can extract out what power
means from that and then you can divorce
the concept from the people and we had
to do that at some point because we can
say power in a human context and we can
imagine what that means but it's
divorced from any specific manifestation
of power well how the hell did we do
that like that's so complicated when we
if you're a chimp the power is in
another chimp it's not some damn
abstraction well so the so the question
is think think about it we're in these
hierarchies many of them across
centuries we're trying to figure out
what the guiding principle is we're
trying to extract out
core of the guiding principle and we
turn that into a representation of a
pattern of BA well it's something like
that that's God it's an abstracted ideal
and it's put in personified form it
manifests itself in personified form but
that's okay because what we're trying to
get at is the in some sense the essence
of what it means to be a properly
functioning and properly properly
functioning properly social and properly
competent individual we're trying to
figure out what that means you need a an
embodiment you need an ideal that's
abstracted that you could act out that
would enable you to understand what that
means and that's what we've been driving
at so that's the first hypothesis in
some sense I'm going to go over some of
the some of the attributes of this
abstracted ideal that we formalized as
God but that's the first sort of
hypothesis is that a philosophical or
moral ideal manifests itself first as a
concrete pattern of behavior that's
characteristic of a single individual
and then it's a set of individuals and
then it's an abstraction from that set
and then you have the abstraction it's
so important so here's a political
implication for example one of the
debates we might say between early
Christianity and the late Roman Empire
was whether or not an emperor could be
God literally right to be deified to put
in a to be good in the temple and you
can see why that might happen because
that's someone at the pinnacle of a very
steep hierarchy has a tremendous amount
of power and influence but the Christian
response to that was never confuse the
specific sovereign with the principle of
sovereignty itself
it's brilliant you see how difficult it
is to come up with an idea like that so
that even the person who has the power
is actually subordinate to something
else subordinate to let's call it a
divine principle for lack of a better
word so even the king himself is
subordinate to the
principle and we still believe that
because we believe that our president
our Prime Minister is subordinate to the
damn law whatever the body of law right
there's a principle inside that that
even the leader is subordinate to
without that you could argue you can't
even have a civilized society because
you're your leader immediately turns
into something that's transcendent and
all-powerful and I mean that's certainly
what happened in the Soviet Union and
what happened in Mao's China and what
happened in Nazi Germany because there
was nothing for the powerful to
subordinate themselves to you're
supposed to be subordinate to God so
what does that mean well we're going to
tear that idea apart but partly what it
means is that your subordinate even if
your sovereign to the principle of
sovereignty itself and then the question
is what the hell is the principle of
sovereignty and I could say we have been
working that out for a very long period
of time and so that's one of the things
that we'll talk about because the
ancient Mesopotamians and the ancient
Egyptians had some very interesting
dramatic ideas about that so it's for
example very briefly there was a deity
known as Marduk and mardik he was a
Mesopotamian dandy and imagine this is
sort of what happened is that as an
empire grew out of the post ice age age
say fifteen thousand years ago ten
thousand years ago all these tribes came
together and these tribes each had their
own daddy their own image of the ideal
but then they started to occupy the same
territory right and so then one tribe
had God a and one tribe had God B and
they one could wipe the other one out
and then it would just be God a who wins
but that's not so good because well
maybe you want to trade with those
people or maybe you don't want to lose
half your population in a war something
like that so then you have to have an
argument about who's God is going to
take priority which ideal is going to
take priority and what seems to happen
is that's represented in mythology as a
battle of the gods in sort of celestial
space but from a practical perspective
it's more like an ongoing dialogue you
believe this I believe this you believe
that I believe this how are you going to
meld that together so you take God a and
you take God being and maybe what you do
is extra
God see from them and you say well God
see now has the attributes of a and B
and then some other tribes come in and
then C takes them over too and so you
get like with Marduk for example he has
a multitude of names 50 different names
while those are names at least in part
of the subordinate gods that represented
the tribes that came together to make
the civilization that's part of the
process by which that abstracted ideal
is abstracted you think this is
important and it works because your
tribes alive and you think this is
important and it works because your
tribe is alive and so we'll take the
best of both if we could manage it and
extract out something that's even more
abstract it covers both of us if we can
do it and one of the things that's
really interesting about Marduk I'll
just give you a couple of of his
features but he has eyes all the way
around his head he's elected by all the
other gods to be king God so that's the
first thing that's quite cool and they
elect him because they're they're facing
a terrible threat sort of like a flood
and a monster combined something like
that and Marduk basically says that if
they elect him top god then he'll go out
and stop the flood monster and and and
they will all get wiped out it's a
serious threat it's chaos itself making
its comeback and so all the gods agree
and Marduk is a new manifestation he's
got eyes all the way around his head and
he speaks magic words and then he also
goes out and when he fights he fights
this deity called taya math and we need
to know that because the word time at is
associated with the word teh home teh om
and tail MS the chaos that God makes
order out of at the beginning of time in
Genesis so it's linked very tightly to
the story and Marduk with his eyes and
his capacity to speak magic words goes
out to confront tire masses like a
watery sea dragon something like that
it's a classic it's a classic st. george
story quote and wreak havoc on the
dragon he cuts her into pieces and he
makes the world out of her pieces and
that's the world that human beings live
in and Mesopotamian Emperor acted out
Marduk he was allowed to be Emperor
insofar as he was a good Marduk so that
meant that he had eyes all the way
around his head and he could speak mad
you can speak properly and so that we're
starting to understand there at that
point the essence of leadership right
because what's leadership is the
capacity to see what the hell is in
front of your face and maybe in every
direction and then the capacity to use
your language properly in a
transformative manner and to transform
chaos into order and god only know how
those how long it took the Mesopotamians
to figure that out and the best they
could do is dramatize it but it's
staggeringly brilliant you know it's by
no means obvious and this chaos is chaos
is a very strange thing is this is the
chaos that God wrestled with at the
beginning of time chaos is what it's
half psychological and half real there's
no other way to really describe it the
chaos is what you encounter when you're
thrown into deep confusion right when
your world falls apart when when you
encounter something that blows you into
pieces when your dreams die when you're
betrayed
it's the chaos that emerges and the
chaos is everything at once and it's too
much for you and that's for sure and it
pulls you down into the underworld and
all that's where the Dragons are and all
you've got at that point is your
capacity to bloody well keep your eyes
open and to speak as carefully and
clearly as you can and maybe if you're
lucky you'll get through it that way and
come out the other side and it's taken
people a very long time to figure that
out and it looks to me like the idea is
erected on the platform of our ancient
ancestors maybe tens of millions of
years ago because we seem to represent
that which disturbs us deeply using the
same system that we use to represent
like serpent Isle serpent Isle or other
carnivorous predators and it you know
we're biological creatures right so when
we formulated our capacity to abstract
our strange capacity abstracted use
language we still have all those
underlying systems that were there when
we were only animals and we have to use
those systems they're they're part of
the emotional and motivational
architecture of our thinking and part of
the reason we can demonize our enemies
who upset our axioms is because we
perceive them as if they're carnivorous
predators we do it with the same system
and that's chaos itself the thing that
always threatened
us right the snakes that came to the
trees when we lived in them like 60
million years ago it's the same damn
systems so the mardik story is partly
the story of using attention and
language to confront those things that
most threatened us and some of those
things are real real world threats but
some of them are psychological threats
which are just as profound but far more
abstractly but we use the same systems
to represent them it's why you freeze if
you're frightened right you're a prey
animal you're like a rabbit you've seen
us you've seen something that's going to
eat you you free and that way your
paralyzed your turn to stone which is
what you do when you see a Medusa with a
head full of staying snakes right you
turn to stone you're paralyzed and the
reason you do that is because you're
using the predator detection system to
protect yourself your heart rate goes
way up and you get ready to move things
that upset us rely on that system and
then the story the mardik story for
example is the idea that if there are
things that upset you chaotic terrible
serpentine monstrous underworld things
that threaten you the best thing to do
is to open your eyes and get your speech
organized and go out and confront the
thing and make the world out of it and
it's it's staggering what I when I read
that story and started to understand it
just blew me away that it's such a
profound idea and we know it's true too
because we know in psychotherapy for
example that you're much better off to
confront your fears head-on then you are
to wait and let them find you and so
partly what you do if you're a
psychotherapist is you help people break
their fears into little pieces the
things that upset them and then to
encounter them one by one and master
them and so you're teaching this process
of eternal mastery over the strange and
chaotic world and that now all of that
makes up some of the backgrounds we
haven't even got to the first sentence
of the biblical stories yet
but all of that makes up the background
so you have to think that we've
extracted this story these are the
extrange collection of stories with all
its errors and its and its repetitions
and and its peculiarities out of the
entire like the entire history that
we've been able to collect ideas and
it's the best we've been able to do and
I know there are other religious
traditions not concerned about that at
the moment because we can use this as an
example but it's the best we've been
able to do and what I'm hoping is that
we can return to the stories in some
sense with an open mind and see if
there's something there that we actually
need and hope and I hope that that will
be the case and as I said I'll approach
it as rationally as I possibly can so
well this is the idea to begin with who
knows we have the unknown as such and
then we act in it like animals act they
act first they don't think they don't
imagine they act and that's that's where
we started we started by acting and then
we started to be able to represent how
we acted and then we started to talk
about how we represented how we acted
and that enabled us to tell stories
because that is what a story is it's to
tell about how you represent how you act
and so you know that because if you read
a book what happens you read the book
and images come to mind of the people in
the book behaving right it's one step
from acting and outfits
you don't act it out because you can
abstract you can represent action
without having to act it out
it's amazing thing and that's part of
the development of the prefrontal cortex
it's part of the capacity for human
abstract thought is you can hold
behavior the representation of the
behavior away from the behavior and
manipulate the representation before you
enacted it that's why you think it's so
that you can generate a pattern of
action and test it out in a fictional
world before you embody it and die
because you're foolish right you let the
representation die not you and that's
why you think and so that's partly what
we're trying to do with these stories
what do I hope to accomplish I hope to
end this 12 lecture series knowing more
than I did when I start
that's my goal because I said that you
know not telling you what I know I'm
trying to figure things out and and and
and this is part of the this is part of
the process by which I'm doing that and
so I'm doing my best to think on my feet
you know I'm going to come prepared but
I'm trying to stay on the edge of my
capacity to generate knowledge and to
make this continually clearer and to get
to the bottom of things and so I'm
hoping that that's what I'm that's what
I want to accomplish and it seems like
people are interested in that so then
we're going to try to accomplish that
together and so that's the that's the
plan and the idea is to see if there's
something at the bottom of this amazing
civilization that we've managed to
construct that I think is imperiled for
a variety of reasons and maybe if we
understand it a little bit little bit
better we won't be so prone just to
throw the damn thing away which i think
would be a big mistake and to throw it
away because of resentment and hatred
and bitterness and historical ignorance
and jealousy and and and the desire for
destruction and all of that it's like I
don't want to go there it's a bad idea
to go there and we need to be grounded
better and so hopefully well we'll see
how this works all right so how do I
approach this well first of all I think
in evolutionary terms you know as far as
I'm concerned the the cosmos is 15
billion years old and the world is
four-and-a-half billion years old and
there's been life for 3 and 1/2 billion
years and an older there were creatures
that had pretty developed nervous
systems 300 to 600 million years ago and
we were living in trees as small mammals
60 million years ago and we we were down
on the plains between 60 million and 7
million years ago and that's about when
we split from chimpanzees and modern
human beings seemed to emerge about 150
thousand years ago and civilization
pretty much after the last ice age
something after fifteen thousand years
ago not very long ago at all you know
and that's that that's the span across
which I want to understand that's the
span across which I want to understand I
want to understand why
our the way we are looking at life and
it's in its continual complexity right
from the beginning of life itself and
there's some real utility in that
because we share attributes with other
animals even Apple Apple animals as
simple as crustaceans for example have
nervous system properties that are very
much like ours and it's very much worth
worth knowing that so I think in an
evolutionary way I think it's a grand
and remarkable way to think because it
has this incredible time span right it's
just amazing I mean people at the end of
the 19th century middle of the 19th
century say thought the world really
thought the world was about 6,000 years
old I mean 15 billion years old that's a
lot more right it's a lot grander it's a
lot bigger but it's also a lot more
frightening and an alienating in some
sense because you know the cosmos has
become so vast it's either easy for
human beings to think of themselves as
trivial specks on a trivial speck some
misbegotten tell who'll end of the
galaxy among hundreds of millions of
galaxies right it's it's very easy to
see yourself as nothing in that span of
time that's a real challenge for people
and and I think it's a mistake to think
that way
because I think consciousness is far
more than we think it is but it's still
something we have to grapple with I'm a
psychoanalytic thinker and what that
means is that I believe that people are
collections of sub personalities and
that those sub personalities are alive
they're not machines they're there they
have their viewpoint they have their
wants they have their perceptions they
have their arguments they have their
emotions they're they're like low
resolution representations of you you
know when you get angry it's like it's a
very low resolution representation of
you it only wants rage or it only wants
something to eat or only once they only
wants water only wants sex it's it's you
but shrunk and focused in a specific
direction and and those all those
motivational systems are very very
ancient very archaic and very very
powerful and they play a determining
role in the manner in which we manifest
ourselves as Freud pointed out with the
in we have to figure out how to take all
those underlying animalistic motivations
and emotions and civilize them in some
way so that we can all live in the same
general territory without tearing each
other to shreds which is maybe the
default position of both chimpanzee and
humanity so so I take that seriously the
idea that we're a loose collection of
spirits and that not that you know it
says in the Old Testament somewhere that
the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom and I think this is akin to that
if you know that you're not in control
of yourself thoroughly and that there
are other factors behind the scenes like
the Greek thought that human beings were
the playthings of the gods that's the
way they conceptualized the world they
sort of meant the same thing they meant
that there are these great forces that
would move us that we don't create it
were that were that we're subordinate to
in some sense not entirely but we could
be subordinate to them and they move our
destinies that was the Greek view and
there's something it teaches you
humility to understand that that that
there's a hell of a lot more going on
behind the scenes and you're you're the
driver of a very complex vehicle but you
don't understand the vehicle very well
and it's got its own motivations and
methods and sometimes you think it's
doing something and it's doing something
completely completely different you see
that in psychotherapy all the time
because you know you help someone unwind
the pattern of behavior that they've
manifested forever first of all they
describe it then they become aware of it
then maybe they start to see what the
cause is they have no idea why they were
acting like that you know they have to
have the memory that produced the
behavioral pattern to begin with it has
to be brought back to mind and then it
has to be analyzed and assessed and then
they have to think about a different way
of acting and it's extraordinarily
complex so psychoanalytic literary well
there's this new there's this postmodern
idea about literature and about the
world for that matter that if you take a
complex piece of literature like like a
Shakespeare play there's no end to the
number of interpretations that you can
make of it
you know you can eat turf at each words
you can interpret each phrase each
sentence each paragraph you could
interpret the entire play the way you
interpret it depends on how many other
books you've read
depends on your orientation in the world
it depends on a very very large number
of things how cultured you are or how
how much culture you lack all of those
things it opens up a huge a huge Vista
for potential interpretation and so the
postmodern sort of stubbed their toe on
that and thought well if there's this
vast number of interpretations of any
particular literary work how can you be
sure that any interpretation is more
valid than any other interpretation and
if you can't be sure then how do you
even know those are great works how you
know they can't maybe they're just works
that the people in power have used to
facilitate their continual accession of
power which is really a postmodern idea
very very cynical one but it has its
point but the thing is it's grounded in
something real right it's like yes you
can interpret things forever
I want to show you something here just
briefly we'll go back to it later look
at this this is the cool one of the
coolest things I've ever seen so at the
bottom here every single one of those
lines is a biblical verse okay
now the length of the line is
proportionate to how many times that
verse is referred to in some way by some
other verse so you say well this is the
first type or length book right I'm not
dead serious about that if you like that
you can't click and get the hyperlinks
obviously but it's a thoroughly
hyperlink book and it's because well the
people who worked on these stories that
are hypothetically at the end right
which is the end can't affect the
beginning that's that's the rule of time
right what happens now can't affect what
happened to you 10 years ago even though
it actually can but whatever
well you reinterpret things right and
then they're not the same but whatever
we won't get into that but technically
speaking the present cannot affect the
past but if you're looking at a piece of
literature that's not right because when
you write the end you know what it was
at the beginning and when you write the
beginning or edit it you know what's at
the end so you can weave the
whole thing together and there's 65,000
cross-references and that's what this
map shows and so that's a great visual
representation of the book and then you
can see well why is it deep why is the
book deep well just imagine how many
pathways you could take through that
right I mean you just journey through
you just journey through that forever
you'd never ever get to the end of it
there's permutations and combinations
and every phrase is dependent on every
other phrase in every verse is dependent
on every other not entirely but 65
thousands is not a bad start so okay
well so so that's another issue in some
sense that seems to make the post
modernist critique even more correct how
in the world you're going to extract out
a canonical interpretation of something
like that it's like it's not possible
but here's the issue as far as I can
tell the interpret so the post
modernists extended that critique to the
world they said look while a text is
complicated enough
you can't extract out a canonical
interpretation what about the world the
world is way more complicated than a
text and so there's an infinite number
of ways that you can look at the world
and so how do we know that any one way
is better than any other way that's a
good question
now the postmodern answer was we can't
and that's not a good answer because you
drown in chaos under those circumstances
right you can't make sense of anything
and that's not good because it's not
neutral to not make sense of things
it's very anxiety-provoking it's very
depressing because if things are so
chaotic that you can't get a handle on
them your body defaults into emergency
preparation mode and your heart rate
goes up at your immune system stops
working and like you burn yourself out
you AIDS rapidly because you're
surrounded by nothing you can control
burying that's an existential crisis
right it's anxiety provoking and
depressing very hard on people and even
more than that it turns out that the way
that we're constructed neuro
physiologically is that we don't
experience any positive emotion unless
we have a name and we can see ourselves
progressing towards that Abe it isn't
precisely attaining the aim that makes
us happy as you
all know if you've ever attained
anything because soon as you attain it
then the whole little game ends then you
have to come up with another game right
so it's it's is ah--this and now that's
ok but but it does show that the
attainment can't be the thing that
drives you because it collapses the game
that's what happens when you graduate
from university it's like you're king of
the mountain for one day and then you're
like surf fest yes at Starbucks for the
next 5 years and also yeah so what
happens is let that human beings are
weird creatures because we're much more
activated by having an aim and moving
towards it than we are by attainment and
what that means is you have to have an
aim and that means you have to have an
interpretation and it also means that
the nobler they aim that's one way of
thinking about it the better in your
life and that's a really interesting
thing to know because you know you've
heard ever since you were tiny that you
should act like a good person you
shouldn't live for example and you might
think well why the hell should I act
like a good person and why not lie and
even a three-year-old can ask that
question because smart smart kids learn
to lie earlier by the way and then they
think well why not
twist the fabric of reality so that it
serves your specific short-term needs I
mean that's a great question why not do
that why act morally if you can get away
with something and it brings you closer
to something you want oh why not do it
these are good questions it's not
self-evident well it seems to me tied in
with what I just mentioned it's like you
destabilize yourself and things become
chaotic that's not good and if you don't
have a noble aim then you have nothing
but but shallow trivial pleasures and
they don't sustain you and that's not
good because because life is so
difficult so much it's so much suffering
it's so complex it ends and everyone
dies and it's painful it's like without
a no blame how can you withstand any of
that you can't you become desperate and
once you become desperate things go
things go from bad to worse very rapidly
when you become desperate and so there's
the idea of the noble aim and it's not
something it's something that's
necessary it's the bread that people
cannot live without right that's not
physical bread it's the no blame and
what is that well it was encapsulated in
part of the story of Marduk that's
that's it's to pay attention it's to
speak properly it's to confront chaos
it's to make a better world it's
something like that and that's enough of
the noble aim so that you can stand up
without you know cringing at the very
thought of your own existence so that
you can do something that's worthwhile
to justify your wretched position on the
planet so now there's this the literary
issue is that so look you take a text
you can interpret in a variety of ways
but that's not right this is where the
postmodernist went wrong because what
you're looking for in a text and in the
world for that matter is is sufficient
order and direction so then we have to
think well what is sufficient order and
direction means well you don't want to
suffer so much that your life is
unbearable right now just seems
self-evident Payne argues for itself
I think of Payne as the fundamental
reality because no one disputes it right
I mean even if you say that you don't
believe in pain it doesn't help when
you're in pain you still believe in it
right it's you can't pry it up with
logic and rationality it just stands
forth as as what the fundamental
existence and that's actually quite
useful to know say well you don't want
any more of that than is absolutely
necessary and I think that's
self-evident and then you say wait a
minutes more complicated than that you
don't want any more of that that's
necessary today but also not tomorrow
and not next week and not next month and
not next year so however you act now
better not compromise how you're going
to be in a year because I'll just be
counterproductive that's part of the
problem with short-term pleasures right
it's like active haste repent at leisure
everyone knows exactly what that means
so you have to act in a way that works
now a.m. tomorrow and next week and next
month and so forth and so you have to
take your future self into account and
human beings can do that and taking your
future self into account isn't much
different than taking other people into
account right because I remember there's
this Simpson episode
and homer downs a quart of mayonnaise
and vodka he said someone Marge says you
know you shouldn't really do that and
Homer says that's a problem for future
Homer I said I'm sure glad I'm not that
guy
and so ridiculous to call me for you
know but but okay but you see we have to
grapple with that and so the you that's
out there in the future is sort of like
another person and so figuring out how
to conduct yourself properly in
relationship to your future self isn't
much different than figuring out how to
conduct yourself in relationship to
other people but then we can expand the
constraints not only does the
interpretation that you extract have to
protect you from suffering and give you
an aid but it has to do it in a way
that's iterable so it works across time
and then it has to work in the presence
of other people so that you can
cooperate with them and compete with
them in a way that doesn't make you
suffer more and people are there they're
not that tolerant you know I mean they
have choices they don't have to hang
around with you they can hang around
with any one of these other primates and
so if you don't act properly at least
within certain boundaries it's like
you're just cast aside and so people are
broadcasting information at you all the
time about how you need to interpret the
world so they can tolerate being around
you and you need that because socially
isolated you're insane and then you're
dead no one can tolerate being alone for
any length of time
we can't maintain our own sanity with a
continual feedback from other people
because it's too damn complicated so
you're constrained by your own existence
and then you're constrained by the
existence of other people and then
you're also constrained by the world no
if I read Hamlet and what I extract out
of that is the idea that I should jump
off a bridge it's like it's it puts my
interpretation to an end relatively it
doesn't seem to be optimally functional
let's say and so an interpretation has
is constrained by the reality of the
world it's constrained by the reality of
other people and it's constrained by
your reality across time there's only a
small number of interpretations
that are going to work in that tightly
defined space and so that's part of the
reason that the post modernists are
wrong it's also part of the reason by
the way that AI people who've been
trying to make intelligent machines have
had to put them in a body if it turns
out that you just can't make something
intelligent in some sense without it
being embodied and it's partly for the
reasons that I just described you need
constraints on the system before you
need constraints on the system so that
the system doesn't drown in an infinite
sea of interpretation it's something
like that so that's the literary end of
it moral well morality for me is about
action and then I'm an existentialist in
some sense what that means is that I
believe that what people believe to be
true is what they act I hope not what
they say and so there's lots of
definitions of truth in truth is a very
expansive word and you can think of
objective truth but behavioral truth
isn't the same as objective truth what
you should do isn't the same as what is
as far as I can tell people debate that
but I think the reasoning that that has
to be the case is because think about it
this way you're standing in front of a
field and you can see the field but the
field doesn't tell you how to walk
through it there's an infinite number of
ways you could walk through it and so
you can't extract out an inviolable
guide how you should act from the array
of facts that are in front of you
because there's just too many facts and
they don't have directionality and but
you you need to know you need to know
how not to suffer and you need to know
what your aim is and so you have to
overlay that objective reality with some
interpretive structure and its nature
that interpretive structure that we're
going to be aiming at hard giving you
some hints about it already we've
extracted it in part from observations
of our own behavior and other people's
behavior and we've extracted it in part
by the nature of our embodiment that's
been shaped over hundreds of millions of
years but we see the infinite plane of
facts and we impose a moral
interpretation on it and the moral
interpretation is what to do about what
is and that's associated both with
security because you just don't need to
complexity and also with aim and so
we're mobile creatures right we need to
know where we're going because all we're
ever concerned about roughly speaking is
where we're going that's what we need to
know where are we going what are we
doing and why and that's not the same
question as what is the world made of
objectively it's a different question
requires different answers and so that's
the domain of the moral as far as I'm
concerned which is what are you aiming
at what and that's the question of the
ultimate ideal in some sense even if you
have trivial little you know fragmentary
ideals this is something trying to
emerge out of that that's it's more
coherent and more integrated and more
applicable and more practical and that's
the other thing is that you know you
think about literature and you think
about arts and you think those aren't
very tightly tied to the earth they're
in period in Airy and spiritual and and
they don't seem practical but I'm a
practical person and part of the reason
that I want to assess these books from a
literary and aesthetic and evolutionary
perspective is to extract out something
of value something of real value that's
practical
you know something because one of the
rules that I have when I'm lecturing is
that I don't want to tell anybody
anything that they can't use because I
think of knowledge as a tool it's it's
something to implement in the world
where tool using creatures and our
knowledge is tools and we need tools to
work in the world we need tools to
regulate our emotions and to make things
better and to put an end to suffering to
the degree that we can and to live with
ourselves properly and to stand up
properly and you need the tools to do
that and so I don't want to do anything
in this lecture series that isn't
practical you know I would want you to
come away having things put together in
a way that you can immediately imply not
interested in abstraction for the sake
of abstraction rational well it's got to
make sense you know because the more
restrictions on your theory the better
and so I want it all laid out causally
so that a and
a full or B follows a and B precedes C
and in a way that's understandable and
doesn't require a leap any unnecessary
leap of faith you know because that's
another thing that I think interferes
with our relationship with a collection
of books like the Bible is that you're
called upon to believe things that no
one can believe and that's no good
because that's a form of lie as far as I
can tell and then well then you have to
scrap the whole thing because in
principle the whole thing is about truth
and if you have to start your pursuit of
truth by swallowing a bunch of lies then
how in the world are you going to get
anywhere with that and so I don't want
any uncertainty at the bottom of this or
I don't want any more than I can eat
them and I have to leave in it because I
can't get any farther than that and so
we it's going to make sense rationally I
want it I don't want it to be pushing up
against what we know to be
scientifically untrue even though
science is in flux and that's you know
somewhat of a dangerous parameter I
don't want if it isn't working with
evolutionary theory for example then I
think that it's not a good enough
solution so and then finally it's
phenomenological modern people you know
we think of the reality as objective and
that's very powerful but that isn't how
we experience reality we have our domain
of experience you know on and it's this
is a hard thing to get a grip on even
though it should be the most obvious
thing for the phenomenal just everything
that you experience is real and so
they're interested in the structure of
your subjective experience let me say
what you have subjective experience and
you have subjective experience so to you
and there's commonalities across all of
those like for example you're you're
likely to experience the same set of
emotions you know we've been able to
identify canonical emotions and
canonical motivations without that we
couldn't even communicate because you
wouldn't know what the other person was
like you'd have to explain infinitely
there's nothing you could take for
granted but you can you know when
phenomenology is the fact that in the
center of my vision my hands are very
clear and then out
periphery they get they disappear and
phenomenology is the way things smell
and the way things taste and the fact
that they matter and so you could say in
some sense that phenomenology is is the
study of what matters rather than matter
and it's a given from the
phenomenological perspective that things
have meaning that it is Andy you know
even if you're a rationalist say a cynic
and Annihilus can you say well nothing
has any meaning you still run into the
problem of pain because pain undercuts
your arguments and has a meaning so
there's no escaping from the meaning you
can pretty much demolish all the
positive parts of it but trying to think
your way out of the negative parts man
good luck with that because that just
doesn't work so phenomenology is and
there are the Bible stories and I think
this is true fiction in general is
phenomenological and it concentrates on
trying to elucidate the nature of human
experience and that is not the same as
the objective world but it's also a form
of truth because it is true that you
have a field of experience and that it
has qualities the question is what are
the qualities now ancient
representations of reality were sort of
a weird meld of observable phenomena
things that we would consider objective
facts and subjective truth the
projection of subjective truth and I'll
show you for example I'll show you how
they've Mesopotamians viewed the world
my data they had a model basically the
world was a disc you know if you go out
in the field at night what does the
world look like of the disc it's got a
dome on top of it
well that was basically the Mesopotamian
view of the world having that view of
the world that the people who wrote the
first stories in the Bible believe - and
on top of the dome there was water well
obviously it's like it rains right where
does the water come from
well there's water around the dome and
then there's land that's the disc and
then underneath that there's water how
do you know that well drill you'll hit
water what's under there it's obviously
because otherwise how would you hit the
water and then what's under that it's
fresh water and then what
that well you go to the edge of the disk
you hit the ocean it's salt water so
it's dome with water outside of it and
then it's a disc that the dome sits on
and then underneath that there's fresh
water and then underneath that there's
saltwater and that was roughly the
Mesopotamian world and you see you see
that's a mix of observation and
imagination right because that isn't the
world but it is the way the world
appears it's a perfectly believable
cosmology from and the Sun rises and the
Sun sunsets on that dome it's not like
the thing is bloody well spinning who
would ever think that up it's obviously
the Sun comes up it goes down and then
travels underneath the world it comes
back up again there's nothing more
self-evident than that well that's
that's that strange intermingling of
subjective fantasy let's say right at
the level of perception and actual
observable phenomena and a lot of the
cosmology that's associated with the
biblical stories is exactly like that
it's half psychology in half and half
and half reality although the
psychological is real as well so so
that's and then to know that the
biblical stories have a phenomenological
truth is really worth knowing because
you know the poor fundamentalists
they're trying to cling to their moral
structure and you know I understand why
because it does organize their societies
and it organizes their psyche so they've
got something to cling to but you know
they don't have a very sophisticated
idea of the complexity of what
constitutes truth and they try to
gerrymander the biblical stories into
the domain of scientific theory you know
procreative promoting creationism for
example as an alternative scientific
theory it's like this just that just
isn't going to go anywhere you know
because the people who wrote these
damned stories weren't scientists to
begin with there weren't any scientists
back then there's hardly any scientists
now you know it's really it's hard to
think scientifically man it's like it
takes a lot of training and even
scientists don't think scientifically
once you get them out of a lab and
hardly even when they're in the lab
we got to get peer-reviewed and
criticized and like it's hard to think
scientifically so and however the people
who wrote these stories thought was more
like dramatists think more like
shakespeare thought but that doesn't
mean that there isn't truth and it just
means that you have to be a little bit
more sophisticated about your ideas of
truth and that's okay you know there are
truths to live by okay well fine then we
want to figure out what those are
because we need to live and maybe not to
suffer so much so so and so as you know
that what the Bible stories and stories
in general are trying to represent is
the lived experience of conscious
individuals like the structure of the
lived experience of conscious
individuals then that opens up the
possibility of a whole different realm
of understanding and eliminates the
contradiction that's been painful for
people between the objective world and
and let's say the claims of religious
stories so okay okay so let's let's
let's take a look at the structure of
the book itself so the first thing about
the Bible is that it's a comedy and a
comedy has a happy ending right so
that's a strange thing because the Greek
god stories were almost always tragic
now the Bible is the comedy it has a
happy ending everyone lives there's a
heaven so now what you think about that
is a completely different issue I'm just
telling you the structure of the story
it's something like there's paradise at
the beginning of time and then some
Cataclysm occurred and people fell into
history and history is limitation and
mortality and suffering and
self-consciousness but there's a mode of
being or potentially the establishment
of the state that will transcend that
and that's what time is aiming at so
that's the that's the idea of the story
now it's a funny thing that the Bible
has a story because it wasn't written at
the book right it was assembled from a
whole bunch of different books and the
fact that it got assembled into
something resembling a story it's quite
remarkable and what the question isn't
well what is that story about and how
did it come up as a story and then I
suppose as well is there anything to it
it constitutes a dramatic record of
self-realization or abstractions or
mentioned that was like the idea for
example of the formulation of the let's
say the image of God is a abstraction
that's how we're going to handle it to
begin with I want to say though because
I said I wasn't going to be any more
reductionist the necessary I know that
the evidence for genuine religious
experience is incontrovertible but it's
not explicable and so I don't want to
explain it away I want to just leave it
as a fact and then I want to pull back
from that and say okay well we'll leave
that as a fact that the mystery and but
we'll look at this we're going to look
at this from a rational perspective and
say that the initial formulation of the
idea of God was an attempt to abstract
out the ideal and to and to consider it
as a abstraction outside its
instantiation so and that's good enough
that's amazing thing if it's true but I
don't want to throw out the baby with
the bathwater let's say it's a
collection of books with multiple
redactors and editors so what does that
mean many people wrote it there's many
different books even and they're inter
woven together especially in the first
five books by people who I suspect took
the traditions of tribes that had been
brought together under a single
political organization and tried to make
their accounts coherent and so it took a
little bit and they took a little of
that and they took a little of this and
they and they tried not to lose anything
because it seemed valuable it was
certainly valuable to the people who had
collected the stories they weren't going
to you know tolerate too much editing
but they also wanted it to make sense to
some degree so it wasn't completely
logically contradictory and and and and
completely absurd and so many people
wrote it and many people edited and many
people assembled it over a vast stretch
of time and we have very few documents
like that and so just because we have a
document like that is it sufficient
reason to to look at it as a remarkable
phenomenon and try to understand what it
is that it's trying to communicate let's
say and then I said it's also the
world's first hyperlinked text which is
which is about again and very much we're
thinking about for quite a long time
all right there's four sources in the
Old Testament or the Hebrew Bible four
stories that we know came together one
was called the priestly the source
called the priestly and it used the name
Elohim or El Shaddai for God and I
believe L is the root word for Ella as
well so and that's usually translated as
God or the gods because Elohim is is
utilized as plural in the beginning
books of the of the of the Bible and
it's newer than the yahwist version now
the reason I'm telling you that is
because Genesis 1 which is the first
story isn't as old as Genesis to Genesis
2 contains the youngest version contains
the story for example of Adam and Eve
and that's older than the very first
book in the Bible but they decided to
put the newer version first and what
isn't and I think it's because it deals
with more fundamental abstractions it's
something like that it's like it deals
with the most basic of abstractions how
the universe was created and then save
ways into what the human environment is
like and so that seems to be the logic
behind it the yahwah's version uses the
name yhw H which apparently people
didn't say but we believe was pronounced
something like yahwah and it it has a
strongly answered amorphic God so one
that takes human form it begins with
Genesis 2:4 this is the account of the
heavens and the earth wind and it
contains the story of Adam and Eve and
Cain and Abel and Noah and the Tower of
Babel and Exodus and numbers alone with
the priestly version it also contains
the law in the form just the form of the
Ten Commandments which is like a
truncated form of the law there's the
elohist source it contains the stories
of Abraham and Isaac it's concerned with
a heavenly hierarchy that includes
angels it talks about the departure from
Egypt and it presents the Covenant code
which is this idea that you know that
society is predicated this was Israeli
society was predicated on a covenant
with God and that's laid out in the
sequence of rules
some of which are the 10 commandments
but many of which are much more
extensive than that and then the final
one is the deuteronomist code and it
contains the bulk of the law and the
what's called the Deuteronomic history
and it's independent of Genesis Exodus
Leviticus and numbers and so we know
that at least for now there's debate
about this like there is about
everything you know so I'm brushing over
a very large area of scholarship but
people generally assume that there were
multiple authors over multiple periods
of time and the way they concluded that
is by looking at textual analysis you
know trying to see where there are
chunks of the stories that have the same
kind of style or the same reference and
people argue about that because you know
obviously it's difficult to recreate
something ancient but that's that's the
basic idea so it is an amalgam of
viewpoints about these initial issues
and that's important to know so it's
like a collective it's a collective
story and okay now to understand the
first part of Genesis I'm going to turn
strangely enough to something that's
actually part of the New Testament and
this is a central element of
Christianity and it's a very strange
idea that's going to take a very long
time to unpack but the idea this is what
John said about Christ he said in the
beginning was the word and so that
relates back to Genesis 1 in the
beginning was the word and the Word was
with God and the Word was God
Oh some well done you know three
sentences like that take a lot of
unpacking because well none of that
seems to make any sense whatsoever
really right in the beginning was the
word and the word was both with God and
the Word was God so the first question
might be what in the world does that
mean in the beginning was the word
that's the logos actually and the logos
is embodied in the figure of Christ so
there's this idea and John that whatever
Christ is the son of God is not only
instantiated in history say at a
particular time in place as I as a
carpenter in some backwoods part of the
world but also something eternal
that exists outside of time and space
that was there right at the beginning
and as far as I can tell what that logos
represents is something like modern
people something like what modern people
refer to when they talk about
consciousness it's something like that
it's more than that it's like
consciousness and it's capacity to to be
aware and it's capacity to communicate
it's something like that and there's an
idea underneath that which is that being
especially from a phenomenological
perspective so the being that is
experience cannot exist without
consciousness like consciousness shines
a light on things to bring it into being
because without consciousness what is
there no one experiences anything like
is there any is there anything when no
one experiences anything that's the
question and the answer that this book
is presenting is that no you have to
think about consciousness as a
constituent element of reality it's
something that's necessary for reality
itself to exist now of course it depends
on what you mean by reality but the
reality that's being referred to here I
told you already is this strange amalgam
of the subjective experience and the
world but the question is deeper than
that too because it is by no means
obvious what there is if there's no one
to experience it in the whole notion of
time itself seems to collapse at least
in terms of something like felt duration
and then the notion of size disappears
essentially because there's nothing to
scale it and the causality seems to
vanish and so and we don't understand
consciousness not in the least we don't
understand what it is that is in us that
gives illumination to be it and what
happens in the old testament at least in
part is that that consciousness is
associated with the divine now you think
well is that a reasonable proposition
and that's a very complicated question
but at least we might note that there's
something to the claim because there is
a miracle of experience and existence
that's dependent on consciousness I mean
people try to explain it away constantly
but it doesn't seem to work very well
and and here's something else to think
about
I think it's really worth thinking about
people do not like it when you treat
them like they're not conscious right
they react very badly to that and then
you don't like it if someone assumes
that you're not conscious and you don't
like it if someone assumes that you
don't have free will you know that
you're just absolutely determined in
your in your actions and there's nothing
that's going to repair you and that you
don't need to have any responsibility
for your actions it's like our culture
the laws of our culture are predicated
on the idea something like people are
conscious people have experienced people
make decisions and can be held
responsible for them that there's a free
will element to it and you can debate
all that philosophically and fight but
the point is is that that is how we act
and that is the idea that our legal
system is predicated on and there's
something deep about it because you know
you're subject to the law but the law is
also limited by you which is to say that
in a well functioning properly grounded
democratic system you have intrinsic
value that's the source of your right
even if you're a murderer
we have to say the law can only go so
far because there's something about you
that's divine well what does that mean
well partly it means that there's
something about you that's conscious and
capable of communicating like you're a
whole world in unto yourself and you
have that to contribute to everyone else
and that's valuable I mean that you can
learn new things you can transform the
structure of society you can invent a
new way of dealing with the world you're
capable of all that it's an intrinsic
part of you and that's associated with
this it's associated that's the idea
there is that there's something about
the logos that is necessary for the
absolute chaos of the reality beyond
experience to manifest itself as reality
it's an amazing idea because it gives
consciousness a constitutive role in the
cosmos and you can debate that but you
know it's not you can't just bloody well
brush it off because first of all we are
the most complicated things there are
that we know of by by a massive
by a massive amount we're so complicated
that it's unbelievable and so you know
there's a lot of cosmos out there but
there's a lot of cosmos in here too and
which one is greater is by no means
obvious unless you use something trivial
like relative size which you know really
isn't a very sophisticated approach and
whatever is that is you has this
capacity to experience reality and to
transform it which is very strange thing
you know you can conceptualize a future
in your imagination and then you can
work and make that manifest you
participate in the process of creation
that's one way of thinking about it and
so that's why I think in in Genesis 1 it
relates the idea that human beings are
made in the image of the divine men and
women which is interesting too because
you know the feminists are always
criticizing Christianity for example as
being what inexorably patriarchal or if
they criticize everything like that so
it's hardly a stroke of bloody brilliant
but I think it's an absolute miracle
that's right at the beginning of the
document it says straightforwardly like
with no hesitation whatsoever that the
divine spark which were associated with
the word that brings forth being is
manifest in men and women equally that's
a very cool thing and you got to think
well like I said you actually take that
seriously well what you got to ask is
what happens if you don't take it
seriously
right that's reading read Garces Keyes
crime and punishment that's the best the
best investigation of that tactic that's
ever been produced because what happens
in Dostoyevsky's crime and punishment is
that the main character whose name is
Raskolnikov decides that there's no
intrinsic value to other people and that
as a consequence he can do whatever he
wants it's only cowardice that stops him
from acting right because what why would
it be anything else other people if the
value of other people is just an
arbitrary superstition then why can't I
do exactly what I want when I want which
is the Psychopaths viewpoint well a
soldier Skolnick law does it killed
someone who's a very horrible person and
he has very good reasons for killing her
and he's half-starved and a little bit
insane and possessed by this ideology
it's brilliant brilliant leo and he
finds out something after he kills her
which is that the post killing
Raskolnikov and the pre killing miss
skullnick oov are not the same person
even a little bit because he's broken a
rule like he's broken a serious rule and
there's no going back and crime and
punishment is ism is a is the best
investigation I know of of what happens
if you take the notion that there's
nothing divine about the individual
seriously now you know most of the
people I know who are deeply atheistic
and I'm and I understand why they're
deeply atheistic they haven't contended
with people like Dostoevsky not as far
as I can tell because I don't see
logical flaws in crime and punishment I
think he got the psychology exactly
right and he doth yes he's amazing for
this because I mean one of his books The
Devil's for example he describes a
political scene scenario that's not much
different than the one we find yourself
in now and there are these people who
are possessed by rationalistic utopian
atheistic ideas and they're very
powerful they give rise to the communist
revolution right I mean they're powerful
ideas and his character stavrogin also
acts out the presupposition that human
beings have no intrinsic nature and no
intrinsic value and it's Britt another
brilliant investigation and dusk yeskey
prophesized that's what I would say what
will happen to a society if it goes down
that road and he was dead exactly
accurate it's uncanny to read
Dostoyevsky's the possessed or the devil
depending on the translation and then to
read Thunder Solzhenitsyn's Gulag
Archipelago because one is fiction and
prophecy and the second is hey look it
turned out exactly the way the
Dostoyevsky said it would for exactly
the same reasons so it's quite
remarkable so well so the question is do
you contend seriously with the idea that
a there's something cosmically
constitutive about consciousness and B
that that might well be considered
divine and see that that is instantiated
in every person and then ask yourself if
you're not a criminal if you don't act
it out
and then ask yourself what that means is
that reflective of a reality or is it a
metaphor like maybe it's a metaphor a
complex metaphor that we have to use to
organize our societies could well be but
even as a metaphor it's it's true enough
so that we mess with it at our peril and
it also took people a very long time to
figure out this is Genesis one you know
what I'm probably going to stop there
because I believe it's nine-thirty and
so we didn't even get to the first line
[Applause]
yeah yeah look I want to read you a
couple of things that we'll use as a Pro
drama for the next lecture because I'll
just bounce through a collection of
ideas that's associated with the notion
of divinity okay and then we'll turn
back to the first lines when we start
the next like I have no idea how far I'm
going to get through the biblical
stories by the way because I'm trying to
figure this out as I go along okay so
you know there's an idea in Christianity
that's good that the image of God is a
Trinity right there's the father is the
element of the father there's the
element of the sunnat' is the element of
the Holy Spirit is something like
tradition the spirit of tradition it's
something like the human being as the
newest incarnation of that tradition
like the living incarnation of that
tradition and then then it's something
like the spirit in people that makes
relationship with this and this possible
the spirit in individuals and so I'm
going to bounce my way quickly through
some of the classical metaphorical
attributes of God so that we kind of
have a cloud of notions about what we're
talking about when we return to Genesis
1 and talk about the God who spoke chaos
into being so there's a fatherly aspect
so here's what God as a father is like
you can enter into a covenant with it so
you can make a bargain with it now you
think about that money is like that
because money is a bargain you make with
the future right so we start
to our world so that you can negotiate
with the future and I don't think that
we would have got to the point where we
could do that without having this idea
to begin with you can you can act as if
the futures a reality there's a spirit
of tradition that enables you to act as
if the future is something that can be
bargained with that's why you make
sacrifices right and the sacrifices were
acted out for a very long period of time
and now there's psychological we know
that you can sacrifice something
valuable in the present and expect that
you're negotiating with something that
represents the transcendent future and
that's a map amazing human discovery
like no other creature can do that to
act as if the future is real to note
that you can bargain with reality itself
and that you can do it successfully
it's unbelievable it responds to
sacrifice it answers prayers I'm not
saying that any of this is true by the
way I'm just saying what the what the
cloud of ideas represents it punishes
and rewards it judges and forgives it's
not nature you see the thing about the
thing that's one of the things that's
weird about the judeo-christian
tradition is that God and nature are not
the same thing at all whatever God is
partially manifest in this logos is
something that stands outside of nature
and that's I think that's something like
consciousness as abstracted from the
natural world so it built even for
mankind and then banished us for
disobedience
it's too powerful to be touched it
granted free will distance from it is
hell distance from it is death it
reveals itself in dogma and in mystical
experience and it's the law so that's
sort of like the fatherly aspect and
then the sun-like aspect it speaks chaos
into order it slays dragons and feeds
people with the remains it finds gold it
rescues virgins it's the body and blood
of Christ it's a tragic victim and
scapegoat and eternally Triana
triumphant Redeemer simultaneously it
cares for the outcasts it dies it is
reborn it's the king of kings and hero
of heroes it's not the state but both is
both the fulfillment and critic of the
state it dwells in the perfect house it
is aiming at paradise
to heaven it can rescue from hell it
cares for the outcast it's the
foundation stone and the cornerstone
that was rejected and it's the spirit of
the law and then it's spirit like it's
akin to the human soul it's the
prophetic voice it's the still small
voice of conscience
it's the spoken truth it's called forth
by music it is the enemy of deceit
arrogance and resentment it's the water
of life
it burns without consuming and it's a
blinding light ok so that's a very
that's a very well-developed poetic set
of poetic metaphors essentially right so
these are all what would you say
glimpses of the transcendent ideal
that's the right way of thinking about
their glimpses of the transcendent ideal
and all of them have a specific meaning
and well in part what we're going to do
is go over that meaning as we continue
with this with this series and so what
we've got now is a brief description at
least of what this is in the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth we
know it's associated with the logos in
this sequence of stories we know it's
associated with the word and with
consciousness and we know that it's
associated with whatever God is and then
I laid out the the metaphoric landscape
that at least in part describes God and
so now we have some sense of the being
that does this creates the heavens and
the earth the earth was without form and
void that's that chaotic state of
intermingled confusion the darkness was
over the face of the deep and the Spirit
of God was hovering over the face of the
waters and God said let there be light
and there was light and so we'll stop
with that because now we're ready to
take a tentative step into the very
first part of this book and it's
important to have your conceptual
framework properly organized so that you
can appreciate where it's going and what
it might possibly meet and so well I've
done what I can today - what would you
say elaborate on this single word I
suppose and
but it's a big word you know so hmm
it's not so unreasonable that it takes a
long time to get to the point where you
have any sense of what it means at all
all right that is nowhere near that is
not I thought I would get a lot for it
all right
so thank you very much
[Applause]
so we do have time for some questions we
have to be out of here at 10:30 it's
9:30 so maybe we'll have questions until
kind of someone crazy grubs microphone
and or maybe we'll have questions for
half an hour something like that and so
if anybody has any questions then
there's a microphone there and there's a
microphone there and I'll try to answer
them to the best that I can
mister my ability so let's sure let's
start okay so you talked about the idea
of when you're confronting something
that you fear you like you face it
head-on and you you destroy it but then
you said that that is when you're
confronting something you make the world
out of it and I was wondering if you
could just I mean they expound me that
means you make your marriage out of the
arguments okay you know you have
arguments with your wife you have
arguments with your children that's that
chaotic state because no one's being
able to formulate a habitable order from
that that domain of controversy and
confusion and then through dialogue you
erect the structure that's a house that
you can both live in and so that's the
that's the idea of making the world out
of that chaos and it's it's frightening
because you know if you're really
happened this is why people often avoid
having disputes with people they love
because it's frightening right you find
out what the person's like and you find
out what you're like it's like God who
wants to do that nobody and so you know
your heart rate goes up and it's
confrontation and conflict and and
that's because you're encountering that
domain that hasn't been properly mapped
or considered and so and you're doing
that with your predator detection
systems essentially and so that chaos
that the threat is the stability say of
the marriage is equivalent to well it's
equivalent to the serpent in the tree
that's one form of equivalence and then
by dialogue through dialogue and
negotiation you formulate the problem
what exactly is going on here where
exactly are we what exactly is the
problem and so you keep talking until
you reach a consensus
when you can live with one that you can
act out right and then you then maybe
you come up with a solution to the
problem and you've established peace
again in peace that's the house that you
can both live in and that's the chaos
that's the chaos that people can fall
into all the time and often do and it's
the chaos that makes a marriage wash up
on the shores and transform into like
you know 50-year divorce court very
horrible thing so that's the idea okay
thank you okay hi dr. Pearson thank you
so much for the talk and thanks for your
teachings it's really helped me a lot of
how to experience in grad school to
English degrees and the way you describe
to the humanities in my experience
helped me understand my experience back
then so thank you so that's too bad next
too bad did that happen communicate
really like that you know it's really
not good but you don't have to tell me
that yeah yeah but you know I survived
and I learned a lot and you know I'm not
you know ungrateful for my experience
I've learned a lot but you said
something you described a Bible the
collection of stories in the Bible
interesting way and I wonder if it was
on purpose you described it as created
by an assembly of stories created by
many people over time the type of length
into itself and it sounds a lot like how
a description of like the Internet and
like how that works yeah well it's not
it's not accidental I mean because the
Internet's also a collective it's a
collective endeavor god only knows what
personality it's going to manifest you
know but it's going to manifest some
personality because it's learning to
understand us very very rapidly so I
think you could there's no reason not to
think about it as a precursor I mean the
distance between the Bible and the
Internet is a lot less than the distance
between a chimpanzee as a human being so
and the difference between a book and
the Internet is it's also it's in some
sense it's a matter of matter of degree
rather than kind so
I I can't speculate you know because god
only knows what's going to happen in the
next 20 years
I certainly don't and so I don't know
what the preconditions are for
consciousness I have no idea and I don't
think anybody knows so I guess we're
going to find out so yep yep hey dr.
Peterson I'm curious about the
connection between aesthetic beauty and
religious experience I think you've
hinted at it once or twice over the
courses lecture is it possible for
something that's incredibly beautiful to
evoke a religious or mystical experience
or something in the same ballpark I
think that's what they're for yeah not a
chance
no I mean if you look at the doctor of
like like a Renaissance Cathedral you
know II was just gonna write right off
my my tag on till I apologize me to drop
my tag on that question the next part
was um is that why we have cathedrals
built like a spectacular buildings as a
book yeah well it's Oxford right well
it's if you're going to house the
ultimate ideal you build something
beautiful right to to represent its
dwelling place and it should be
beautiful and this is something that
people do not take seriously and this is
especially something we don't take
seriously in Canada I mean one of you
think about you think about all the
hundreds of millions of dollars that
were invested into beauty in Europe in
the spectacular excessive investment in
beauty that's paid back god only knows
how many multiples of times people make
pilgrimages to Europe constantly because
it's so beautiful that it just it
staggers you Beauty is so valuable and
we're so afraid of it and I think we're
afraid of it because it does it's a
pathway it's not the only pathway to the
divine I mean there's a lot there's
pathways to the divine love is one of
them I suppose but beauty especially for
people who have an affinity
four beauties it's like music it's one
of those things that you can't argue
against right you can't even understand
it just hits you and and it does it
shows you well it shows you the ideal
that's one way of thinking about it but
it also shows you I think it's like a
vision of the potential future it's
something like that as well that if we
just got our act together and and
beautified things that that's the place
that we can inhabit and that would in
noble us and that's why this Jerusalem
heavily City is paved with gemstones you
know their crystalline the emit light
and yeah it's the proper dwelling place
for an enlightened consciousness beauty
is the proper dwelling place for an
enlightened consciousness and we we
ignore it at our spiritual and economic
peril it's like it's obvious that beauty
there's almost nothing more valuable
than beauty economically practically
right so yeah why that is I mean I don't
it's very who knows you know I mean why
we we experience gemstones for example
as beautiful it's very mysterious but
there are deep reasons for it so yeah hi
I have a bit of a similar question
actually um I know what one of the ways
in which the Bible is appreciated even
by you some of its harshest critics and
deeply atheistic people is as a work of
literature and n is something I'm at
least the King James or the authorized
translation the Bible is something very
aesthetically beautiful and a great work
of literature and a great work of poetry
and I'm wondering just from your study
of it and from your personal perspective
if there's any any particular passages
or our parts of it do you find
particularly I have struck you in that
way or that you do cherish more than
more than any others because you be able
to share well the ones that have really
open the ones that have really opened up
to me I think are the stories in Genesis
right up to the Tower of Babel because I
think well and hopefully I'll be able to
talk to all of you about that but I
think I got some sense of what they mean
and why I mean I know it's not
exhaustive and obviously but like and
then there Nestorian Exodus as well I
so filled it like I've got a handle on
that and so those of those have hit me
really really hard and that you know I
mean just trying to understand this
first part of Genesis to try to
understand what these concepts mean has
been especially when I started to
understand that the concept that human
beings are made in God's image at God it
has all those attributes that we just
described but human beings are made in
God's image that that's actually the
cornerstone of our legal system not
really that really rattled me because I
didn't understand that clearly that our
body of laws has that metaphysical
presupposition without which the laws
fall apart and that's starting to happen
it really is you know like the
postmodern critique of law the law
schools are I would say they're overrun
by post modernists who are undermining
the structure of Western law as fast as
they possibly can because they don't buy
any of this and so they're much more
likely to just think of the law as
something like a like a casual pragmatic
tool to be manipulated for the purposes
of bringing forth the Utopia it's a
really really really bad idea so it's
very strange to me that we go off track
when metaphysical foundation starts to
get rattled so do you think your your
appreciation of the aesthetic studium it
comes from a belief in like the truth of
its underlying propositions I mean that
because like even the atheistic critics
I'm thinking of like like even Dawkins
or kitchens really appreciate the Bible
it has just a piece of really beautiful
literature and I guess the quality of
their writing and certain exalted themes
behind it even if they totally reject
the underlying premise of it you seem
good yeah well I don't think that you
can see it as beautiful and poetic with
the end reject the underlying premises
because if you see it as beautiful and
poetic you're accepting the underlying
premises with your experience of the
beauty and the poetics even though you
may be maybe fighting it with your
articulated rationality so I think all
that indicates is a dis integrated
perspective on the book and I'm not it's
not surprising that that's the case I
mean it's the perspective that everyone
has on the book except with them it's
more well developed and well thought
through but I think it's fundamental
they're not approaching the thing with
enough respect that's my senses they and
who knows right because I don't I don't
know but what I've tried to do is to
think there's probably more to this than
I know and then try to understand it
from that perspective rather than to
think for example log2 collection of of
superstitions that we've somehow
outgrown it's like no it's just
sorry that's that's not a deep enough
analysis because it's got some truth but
it doesn't take into account the fact
that the proposition still stand at the
foundation of our culture it doesn't
address Nietzsche's central concern
which is that if you blow out the notion
of God the entire structure crumbles you
know on you can debate that fine
but I just you know just assume that you
debated it with Nietzsche because he's a
pretty tough customer to tangle with so
I don't think that the Atheist types
insofar as there's a type I don't think
they've wrestled with the real problems
so yeah
[Applause]
so I appreciate you set up some ground
rules keep things rational and I think
that's going to help us what I'm
wondering is so for instance you said
elsewhere the New Testament from the
best from what you can see it's
psychologically correct and that's you
know quite astounding I would say
there's a lot of truth and in in your
depictions of these stories elsewhere
you've pointed out like deep truths you
know they're real powerful so what my
question would be is if we can say
Nietzsche took a like an order of
magnitude of you know intelligence and
you know depth to be able to predict
what would happen in the next century
you know rationally if the Bible is not
the inerrant Word of God what's going on
that's a good question that's a really
good question I mean I'm going to try to
answer that rationally but but and as we
move forward but as I said I don't want
to leave people with the notion because
you know some ways it's something I've
thought about what I've been thinking
about for a long time is I can't tell if
I'm a like an advocate of the religious
viewpoint or its worst possible critic
because I am doing my best to make it
rational and there's a reductionistic
element to that but I think that I'm
doing that while also leaving the door
open to things that I don't understand
because I know that there's there's more
to this story than I understand or can
understand and I'm laying out what I can
understand and I'm making it rational
but I do not believe for an instant that
that exhausts the realm it's like there
are ways of interpreting these stories
that work in the conceptual universe we
inhabit right now but there's a lot of
things that we don't understand and what
I'm the thing I've found about digging
into these stories is that the deeper
you dig the more you find and that's
pretty damaged that's one of the things
that convinced me that there was more to
them that I had originally suspected
because things would click and I think
wow that's true that's really something
and then I would take it apart further
and I think whole well I thought that
was something but this is this is even
more remarkable it just keeps opening
and opening and so I'm going to make it
so I'm going to try to provide an answer
to and it is I think you're right about
speaking about Nietzsche and his
capacity for prophecy and Dostoyevsky's
in the same category like there are
prophetic elements to the old and new
Testament that seemed to stretch over
much vaster spans of time and I'm going
to try to produce a rational account of
that but it mean one of the reasons that
I think the New Testament is
psychologically true let's say is
because and this is one of the things
that's that's that's deeply embedded in
the structure of the Bible in the Old
Testament there's this idea of I'm
skipping ahead that through a succession
of states the people who behave properly
will eventually establish the proper
state and so the state is viewed in some
sense as the of the entity of salvation
but what happens in the New Testament is
that idea gets you could say
deconstructed and instead of a state
being the place of redemption a state of
being becomes the state of redemption
and so the idea that human beings will
be redeemed moves from a utopian state
vision to the responsibility of the
individual and I think that's correct I
mean I believe that that's the right
answer and I think that the West in
particular is predicated on idea that
idea because it makes the state
subservient to the individual I mean as
a is what a dialog continual dialogue
but in the final analysis the locus of
the divine is the individual not the
state and I believe that that's so true
that if we don't act it out and believe
it then we all die painfully and that's
true enough for me so
I thank you for illuminating talk I'm
going to keep you on the creation story
and if you don't mind because we know
the editing that was done there was the
purpose for the editing can you give us
your thoughts about the difference in
the story of creation especially
pertaining to men from the first chapter
which is very godlike you know by a word
and to the second one which is more like
a fatherly type of creation is it the
selling point what was the reason for
this type of editing to put the two
together why not well I think you know
the more cynical would call critic
criticisms of the Bible and the
religious tradition criticisms like
Marx's or Freud's even for that matter
make the case that it's a power it's a
manifestation of power in politics and
and that there's always a political or
economic motivation behind the
construction of the stories and I think
that that's true to some degree but I
don't think that it's true enough so
that you can take that particular
interpretive tack and be done with it
and I would say that to the degree that
there are political and economic
motivations that have shaped the stories
the fact that multiple stories have come
together they're sort of corrective in
some sense and so even at the level of
detail there's political intrigue and
politics say with regards to the
ascendancy of Israel when you step away
from it it becomes something that's more
Universal and escapes from that and how
that happened I don't know I mean I
think it's safe to say it's reasonably
safe to say that the people who put this
document together they did two things I
think they were guided by their
aesthetic taste and their conscience I
truly believe that and the reason I
believe that is because I think anything
that was propagandistic would have been
forgotten and he can't remember
propaganda no one likes it it's like
it's dead ten years after you write over
20 years and it isn't only that these
books were assembled in written it was
that they were preserved and remembered
and to me that means they have enough
entity with the structure of memory I
mean you think about how does this story
last 10,000 years unless it's the kind
of story you can remember it doesn't
because you forget all the forgettable
stuff and all you remember is the
memorable stuff and so there's this
there's this interplay between the
document itself and its audience that
shapes the document and so now I don't
know how specifically I answered your
question we're going to hit the
different stories as they come up in
sequence and I think I'll shed some more
light on the relationship between them
I'm doing that and we'll start with that
next week okay right so I've been really
interested in a lot of the stuff that
you've been saying about dreams because
I've been lucid dreaming a lot for many
years but always in a sort of a theistic
way it's sort of like a game or
something like that but because of
seeing your talk and everything I've
started to think of it from a different
perspective like you're now interfacing
with something beyond the narrow scope
of your conscious awareness that or
something like that maybe mythological
or maybe something like God and so what
I've been thinking about and what it may
be wonder what you think about it is
that in some way is when you're lucid
dreaming you're kind of Trent you're
getting beyond lived in limitations of
an ordinary dream you're sort of
transcending limitations which maybe is
like it's not the purpose of people
right is it because as a person you're
supposed to be limited in some way as
opposed to like God Ruiz like not
limited and how but on the other hand
it's a good opportunity to kind of have
control over your interactions with this
like very special and like interesting
thing so I guess the conundrum is that
on one hand like you can you can control
your interactions but on the other hand
like you are controlling them so I guess
I'm wondering what you think about that
and also just in general what do you
think about lucid dreaming is a thing
like should you do it or I had a client
who could really lucid dream you know
and one of the things she used them now
and then to solve problems even though
she didn't always pay attention to the
answer
sometimes she did
she wanted her in one of her dreams one
of the characters told her that she
would have to learn to live in a
slaughterhouse she was very afraid of
life and one of the consequences of that
was that we went watched an embalming so
so the dreams were but one of the things
she did she'd asked the characters what
they were up to you know she was instead
of controlling she would inquire and so
but I don't know what to say about lucid
dreaming beyond that like I know it's a
well-documented phenomena and many
people can do it and women seem to be
able to do it better than men that's
what the research indicates but I think
that what we don't know about lucid
dreaming could fill a lot of books so I
think you do there is some danger in
controlling it I think because you lose
the spontaneous revelation although not
completely because you can't control it
completely but I like see you might be
interested in reading Jung's works on
active imagination because he kind of
learned to dream when he was awake and
he spent a lot of time in the world of
imagination when he was awake the red
books for example the red book is a
document of his experiences with awake
dreaming but he was very interactive
with the dream you know instead of
trying to bend it to his grandma's will
he was he was exploring it in some sense
like you'd explore a videogame you know
which are forms of Dreams in and of
themselves so yeah I would say do it
with an exploratory purpose in mind you
could always ask yourself what you could
learn too which is a very dangerous
question to ask a dream because
sometimes you'll find out what you have
to learn that's not so pleasant but it's
really worthwhile okay yes
okay so I think I think I'm going to
take four more questions only because
I'm running out of braids and I don't
want to say stupid things or stupider
things that I've already said so so yeah
thank you for the talk in the beginning
of your lecture you talked about how
society needed this kind of dreamlike
religious base so we don't go between
left and right violently and we can kind
of have this base and then you also said
you admired Nietzsche for kind of
chopping down these these ideological
and kind of dogmatic weeds coming up
from the base of Christianity
I was wondering how what your thoughts
are on how society can have this kind of
religious base without having these kind
of dangerous ideologies that can spring
up once in a while that's what I'm
trying to figure out no really I mean
that really that's the serious answer to
that question you know I mean the reason
that I'm an admirer of Nietzsche is
because he was the spirit of his time so
that's a good way of thinking about it
it's not like Nietzsche killed God it's
that Nietzsche gathered what was in the
air and articulated it right incredibly
profoundly and so he put his finger on
the spot and now in doing so he
announced the problem and once you
announced the problem then maybe you can
come up with a solution because you
can't solve a problem unless you know
what it is and the fact that he made it
so stark and so clear is horrifying in
some sense but at least we know where we
stand
and so since then I would say
particularly with in many ways
particularly with the work of yoga and
everything that's come out of that which
is a deeper study of mythology and its
meanings and we've been trying to
address that the issue that needs you
brought up and trying to solve the
problem the problem is something like
the reunification of the spirit of
mankind it's something like that well
we're slogging through it man and that's
that's that that's why you're all here
at least in part so we'll see how far we
can get by at this rate we'll get to
like the 12th verse in the first
yeah but that same you know okay
[Applause]
yes they'll be in they'll be in the
video I could also make them available
add slides yeah well that's okay I'll
return to this when we when we get going
again so oh yeah different colors
represent the distance between the
between the cross references yeah well
there I'll talk about that more next
time I mean I think that the best answer
to that is I'll talk more about that
next time I mean I think of them as
overlapping metaphorical domains you
know in the descriptions I put of the
fatherly aspect that some aspect in the
spirit aspect you can swap a lot of
those you know it's kind of arbitrary
but I think they're I think the
trinitarian idea is trying to get
forward the notion that the locus of the
divine is is it's the same thing in its
essence but it exists in a multiplicity
it exists as the spirit of tradition it
exists as the living individual in the
end time and space and then it it exists
as the spirit that well and as
consciousness something like that that
we all share which which you know you
would have thought about that is
something like the capacity for the
individual to realize that tragedy and
redemption of Christ in their individual
life and that's something like your
capacity to voluntarily accept the
tragic conditions of your existence and
to move forward to something resembling
paradise regardless of that you know as
something that's intrinsic to you and I
think that's associated with the idea of
the Pentecost and and and the Holy
Spirit all of that it's it's so that's
as good as I can do in a short
of time so yep I think it's because it's
because of the gap between what we
articulate and what we don't know
something has to fill that gap like I
think the law could be could could
replace it if the law was total but it
isn't it's it's bounded and incorrect
and there's something arrests it has to
rest on something inside that's like
this mediator between what we articulate
and what we don't understand it's
something like custom it's something
like expectation it's something like the
intrinsic sense of justice you know that
the law itself is aiming at and those
aren't fully articulated but without
them there'd be no grounding like
without the body the law would be a
dictionary you know and if you don't
know what a word means using the
dictionary is helpful but not that
helpful because like unless you've had
the experience of anger the dictionary
can't tell you what anger means it's
just refers to other words but the words
themselves refer to something else and
the law refers to something else and
without that it has to be in tune with
that something else and has to be in
accordance with it and so I I don't
think we can ever delineate the proper
body of laws and that's also why you
like ideological utopias see the unity
illogical utopia is dispensed with the
transcendent they say this is what we
need to do it's like no you don't know
that's not good you have to leave space
for what you kind of know and for what
you don't know and I mean you know in
the story of the Tower of Babel human
beings make this massive building that's
supposed to reach up to the heavens so
that it'll take the place of God well
that's that's the earliest warning we
have of the danger of making things so
big that you confuse them with God and
God gets irritated and comes down and
makes everybody speak
four languages and scatters them it's
like well that's what happens when you
try to make something a totality is that
it starts to fragment inside and and
disintegrates into catastrophe and so
it's almost as if we have to maintain
this articulated space inside the dream
inside the custom something like that
because otherwise it doesn't work
and I think that's the same as having
respect for the fact that we have bodies
you know we're not just abstract
creatures that follow rules
we're not that at all we only follow
certain rules we won't follow the other
ones and our societies will crumble and
so and we just don't know enough to
articulate the entire landscape of
behavior with articulated rules not at
all we can't do it it's beyond us yeah
yeah okay thanks for the talk my
question is also about dreams you spoke
about dreams as like a representation of
truths and universal truths that can be
interpreted into like myths and and
religion and as as you say it's very
beneficial for the individual and it
sounds like also for for the society as
well because not everyone can as easily
remember their dreams or interpret their
dreams like that and also it's it's like
broadcasted to to all of society for
their benefit so I guess I'm wondering
what the evolutionary advantage of
dreams are and my question would be do
you think that dreams suggest some sort
of evolutionary group selection so
should I like groups that don't have
these dreams that are represented into
myths and religion do you think they
they didn't survive as well okay so I'm
not going to answer the second part of
that question because I'd have to go far
too far off at a tangent for me to
manage right now but I can answer the
first part I mean what happens when
you're dreaming there's a little switch
so to speak in your brain that shuts off
when you're dreaming and it stops you
from moving right it shuts everything
except your eyes because who you know if
you're moving your eyes back and forth
is not going to get run around and get
eaten by a lion it's okay to move your
eyes but the rest of you is stand
exactly where it is then you can run
these simulations and so what's
happening at night and this is a fairly
well accepted theory of dreaming we know
that dreams update memories and help
consolidate memories they also help you
forget but what seems to be happening at
night is that you're you're running the
underlying architecture of your
cognitive ability in different
simulations babbling on its cost-free
because you're you're paralyzed you
don't running around they're out in the
world investigating so it's part of the
manner in which your brain experiments
with the way the world can be
represented and so and it seems
absolutely necessary and I mean if you
deprive people of REM sleep they don't
stay sane very long there's something
necessary about the Dreaming process to
maintenance of the of articulated sanity
so you're doing some kind of
organization at night when you descend
into that chaos and partly what seems to
happen is that your categorical you know
your categories have boundaries right
sometimes you don't have the categories
correct and so the boundaries have to
loosen and other things need to be put
into categories or some things shunted
away and in the dream the category
structure loosens which is why dreams
are so peculiar but they're
experimenting it's your mind is
experimenting with the underlying
categorical structure of imagination and
trying to update your your mode of being
in the world dreams often concentrate on
things that provoke anxiety so if you
wake people up when they're dreaming the
most commonly reported emotion is
anxiety and so the dream is like the
first stages of the attempt to contend
with the unknown and so the dream is
half unknown and half known which is
also why it's so peculiar you know
because you kind of understand it but
you don't really and it partakes up the
unknown and of the known and it's the
bridge between the two something like
that so
[Applause]
okay so my question is kind of two parts
the first one is just like a general
question and then just the application
of the question so my first question is
do you think that consciousness and
being hood are in extra inextricably
linked and then secondly so if there was
something like a supercomputer that one
could house theoretically a perfect
brain of a person in it does that thing
then become the same person as the
person who is before so is there a
transcendency to being good but not too
conscious okay so the first question is
well I would say that the kind of being
that these stories are concerned with is
absolutely dependent on consciousness
now whether or not that means that being
as such is dependent on consciousness
actually depends on how you define being
right so it's always tricky when you ask
and it is a an instant an example of B
those are tricky questions because it
depends on how you define the two but
for our purposes the being that we're
discussing that's represented in these
stories is intrinsically associated with
conscious experience and consciousness
has given this constitutive role it says
that the experience that we're talking
about would not exist if consciousness
did not exist so you can think about it
as a kind of game in a way and then you
have to decide for yourself whether
that's a game that can be generalized
and I won't answer the second part okay
if you don't mind all right
[Applause]
so two-part question first ones very
quick almost admin if we want to read
the biblical stories that kind of be
referring to as a particular version
edition source publisher we should refer
to all bring the thing I like next week
which is a I think the Reader's Digest
published it of all things but it's a it
lays out the narratives in a different
format it's easy I find it much easier
to read so I'll show it to you and I'll
bring it next time and show it to you
one of the main reasons I'm interested
in so much of your work and I think many
people are as well as that you kind of
leave literalism at the door and you
open up another door to a much more
deeper meaning in your interview with
transluminal media you mentioned
disciples book the serpent the treatise
yeah yeah and envision and you note that
we as a species are very good at
recognizing camouflage patterns of
snakes particularly in the lower field
of vision and you further note that
visual acuity is correlated with that
and that it co-evolved and you summarize
thusly by saying the following down
paraphrasing you say what gives you
vision snakes - that's what it says in
Genesis what else gives you vision fruit
that's also right that's why we have
color vision what makes you
self-conscious fear man woman that's Eve
and so I understand at the elementary
level some of the concepts that you have
about representations dreams
abstractions etc but kind of raises the
question for me you know I'm not
accusing of any creationism or
literalism yeah you know what's your
point why did you make that connection
what's the meaning of the story of
Genesis visa vie Liz eigvals book no
problem we're gonna as soon as I get
past this first Genesis one we're going
to we're going to hit that hard so so
well hardly
yes I'm suggesting that it foreshadowed
it and and I think they're the same
thing I mean is Beldon her books plays
with that idea metaphorically but she
never really takes it seriously which is
no problem I mean there's only so much
you could take seriously and she did a
fine job of what you did but I'll talk
about that a lot because it's a very
complicated issue I mean I would say to
begin with it
that the systems that you use to deal
with radical uncertainty are the same
systems that your primate ancestors
evolved to deal with snakes that's a
good start
so okay okay one more and then we're
done I'm an aerospace science engineer
and an expert computer programmer and I
have three rapid-fire questions so I'm
going to get through them quick based on
your opinion of where the universities
now stand in terms of humanities and
social sciences it's mathematics more
powerful than articulated speech I'm not
sure I'm not exactly sure how the first
oh well it depends on what you mean by
power I guess I mean obviously studying
mathematics and computer science makes
you insanely powerful the question is to
what end and I don't think that you can
extract an answer to that from the study
of mathematics the humanities are there
to ground people in proper citizen hood
that's that's a way of thinking about it
and so yes it makes you powerful but
then the question is who has the power
because it might not be you it might be
the mathematics so to speak you know
because you never know what you're an
agent of precisely and so yeah well look
I've got nothing against computer
programmers I mean more power to you
guys and mathematicians as well but that
yes and it has to be a truth right it
has to be a tool of something and what
the humanities were forward to Tate was
to tell people what the tools should be
used for and so the tools themselves are
easily powerful but that's that's not
necessarily you know untrammeled good so
I have to stop because okay quick
already want to answer this question
okay okay you were in this I guess one
room in a museum in New York dancing
some original Renaissance artwork
masterpiece yeah these are generally
accepted as amazing artifacts okay does
an original work of art as opposed to a
high fidelity reproduction contained the
spirit of the artist who created it and
does this account for the disparity and
how much you'd have to pay for it does
in part I'm going to a good portrait
artist II and one of the things he
pointed out about a great portrait is
that it actually contains time so you
know because the photograph is one
instant but a portrait is you layered on
you layered on you late so it's got a
thickness you know and I think you can
see that thickness in the original but
it's also a direct manifestation of that
creative active perception I don't think
you get that you just can't get the
fidelity of the original with the
reproduction but there's more to it than
that too because the painting doesn't
end with the frame you know like we tend
to think of the painting itself as the
object but but most objects are are
densely innervated with hist with
historical context and you can say well
the historical context isn't the object
but it depends on what you mean by the
object and often people when they buy a
piece of a painting are buying the
historical context and you just don't
get that with the reproduction it's a
kind of magic it's like you want to have
Elvis Presley's guitar or another guitar
just like it well you want to have
Elvis's guitar that's why you can't tell
it's all of us as guitar by looking at
it well it is at the level of detail but
not at the level of context that's how
it looks to me okay we got to go
okay well I thought this time that I
would actually cover some of the
biblical stories so and hopefully a
number of them as I said last time I'm
going to go through this while as fast
as I am able to I want to do it as
completed job as possible and of course
the probability that I'll get through
the entire Bible is very low but we'll
get through a lot of the major stories
in the beginning of it and that's a good
start and then you know assuming that
this all goes well then maybe I'll try
to do the same thing again either in the
fall or next year so assuming I'm that
everything is still working out properly
next year it's a long ways away all
right so I guess we'll start so last
week I talked to you about a line in the
New Testament that was from John and it
was a line that was designed to parallel
the opening of Genesis and it's it's a
really important line and I thought I
would re-emphasize it because the Bible
is a book that's been written forward
and backwards in time in some sense like
most books because if you write a book
of course when you get to the end if
you're the writer you can adjust the
beginning and so on so it has this odd
it has this appearance of linearity but
it really it isn't linear it's like
you're God in some sense standing
outside of time that's your book and you
can play with time anywhere along it and
the people who put the book together or
the books together took full advantage
of that and and and that makes the story
it gives the story odd parallels in in
many many places in a very large number
of places and this is one of the major
parallels at least from the perspective
of the Christian interpretation of the
Bible which of course includes the New
Testament and so there's this strange
idea that Christ was the same factor
or force that God used at the beginning
of time to speak habitable order into
being and that's a very very strange
idea you know it's not it's not
something that can be just easily
dismissed as superstition partly because
it's so strange it doesn't it doesn't
even fit the definition of like a
superstitious belief it's it's a
dreamlike belief in some sense and what
I what I see many of the ideas in the
Bible as is is these dreamlike ideas
that that under not lie are our
normative cognition and that constitute
the ground from which are more
articulate articulated and and explicit
ideas have emerged and this one's so
complicated this idea is so complicated
that it's still mostly embedded in
dreamlike form but it seems to have
something to do with the primacy of
consciousness and this is one of the
biggest issues regarding the structure
of reality as far as I can tell because
everyone from physicists to
neurobiologists debates this there's
there's the the stumbling block for a
purely objective view of the world seems
to me to be consciousness and
consciousness has all sorts of strange
properties for example it isn't obvious
what constitutes time or at least
duration in the absence of consciousness
and it isn't also easy to understand
what constitutes being in the absence of
consciousness because it seems to be the
case well if a movie is running and
there's no one to watch it I know it
sounds like the tree and the forest
idea but it's it's not that idea at all
if a movie is watching is running and no
one's watching it in what sense is can
you say that there's even a movie
running because the movie seems to be
the experience of the movie not the
objective elements of the movie and
there's something about the world at
least insofar as we're in it as human
beings that is dependent on conscious
experience of the world now of course
you can take consciousness out of the
world and say well if none of us were
here if there was no such thing at
consciousness then the cosmos would
continue running the way it is running
but of course it depends on what exactly
you mean by the cosmos when you make a
statement like that because there's
something about the subjective
perience of reality that gives it
reality or at least that's one way of
looking at it and since we're all pretty
enamored of our own consciousness as
although they're painful because they
define our being it's not unreasonable
to give consciousness a kind of
metaphysical primacy now and it's deeper
than that you know deeper idea than that
because there are physicists and they're
not trivial physicists like like John
Wheeler who believes that in some sense
consciousness plays a constitutive role
in transforming the chaotic potential of
being into the actuality of being he
actually thinks about it he's not alive
anymore but he actually thought about it
as as playing a constitutive role you
know and then from the neurobiological
perspective or from the scientific
perspective it's not consciousness is
not something we understand I don't
think we understand it at all it's
something we can't get a handle on with
our fundamental materialist philosophy
and I don't know why that is it's quite
frustrating if you're a scientist but it
isn't clear to me that we've made any
progress whatsoever in understanding
consciousness even though what we've
been trying to understand it for
hundreds of years and even though
psychologists and neurobiologist and so
forth have really like put a lot of
effort into understanding consciousness
from a scientific perspective in the
last 50 years so anyways what it seems
to me is the idea that that God used the
word to to extract order out of
habitable order out of chaos at the
beginning of time which is roughly the
right way of thinking about it seems to
me deeply allied with the idea that what
it is that we do as human beings is is
encounter something like a formless and
potential chaos I mean we're not
omniscient obviously and we can't just
do whatever we want but we encounter a
formless and chaotic potential that's
always what we're grappling with and
somehow we use our consciousness to give
that form and this is how people act
like if you look at how they regard
themselves it's how they act because you
say things to people like well you
should live up to your potential when
you make a case that there's something
about a person that's more than what is
that yet could be if only they
participated in the process properly
and everyone knows what that means and
no one acts like a mystery has been
uttered when you say that and you know
you can see a situation in your own life
that's full of potential you're often
extremely excited when you encounter
something that's full of potential
because what you see is something that
could be you see a future beckoning for
you that could be if only you interacted
with it properly and it activates your
nervous system right in a very basic way
and we even understand how that happens
to the degree that we understand how the
nervous system works because the systems
that mediate positive emotion which are
governed roughly by dopa by the
neurochemical dopamine and which have
their roots way down in the ancient
hypothalamus a very very archaic and and
fundamental part of the brain it that
responds to potential which is the
possibility of accruing something new
and valuable it responds to potential
with active movement forward and
engagement and so we're engaged in the
world as potential and looks like
consciousness does that and so there's
this idea that this is the main idea
that I think is being put forth in
Genesis one it's something like and you
see this in mythology like from from
what I've been able to gather there's
always three causal elements that make
up being at the bottom of world
mythology and one is the formless
potential that makes up being once it's
interacted with and that's generally
given a feminine nature and I think
that's because it's like the source from
which all things emerge and rise it's
something like that it's more
complicated than that but it's something
like that and then there's some kind of
interpretive structure that has to
grapple with that formless potential and
that's I think that's the sort of thing
that was alluded to by Immanuel Conklin
when he was criticizing the notion that
all of our information comes from sense
data which would be the pure empirical
perspective right because when you
encounter the world you encounter it
with a cognitive structure that already
has shape and so it's already in you
this structure and without that a priori
structure you wouldn't be able to take
the formless potential and give it
structure and I think that's something
it's a can in some way to the idea of
God the Father and I'll try to develop
that idea more it's it's the it's the
notion that there's something
in all of us that transcends all of us
that's deeply structural that's part of
this ancient while I would say
evolutionary and cultural process that
enables us to grapple with the formless
potential and bring forth reality
roughly speaking and then there's the
final element and that element seems to
be something like consciousness itself
the consciousness that actually in
here's in the individual so it's not
only that you have a structure it's that
the structure has the capacity for
action in the world and it's like it's
your this your the spirit that gives the
dead structure life it's something like
that and as far as I can tell the
Trinitarian notion that characterizes
Christianity is something like well
formless potential which is never given
a the status of a deity in Christianity
and then the notion that there's an a
priori interpretive structure that's a
consequence of our ancient existence as
beings it goes back as far in time as
you can go the notion of a structure and
then the idea of a consciousness that
that is the is the tool of that
structure and that interacts with the
world and gives it and gives it reality
and that's the word as far as I can tell
and so the notion is is that there's a
father and that's the structure and
there's a son that's transcendent that
characterizes consciousness itself and
that it's the son the speaking of the
son that is the active principle that
turns chaos into order and god it's such
a sophisticated ideas as far as I'm
concerned because well there's something
about it that's at least predominately
accurate because you do have an
interpretive structure and you couldn't
understand anything without it your very
body is an interpretive structure right
it's been crafted over let's say three
billion years of evolution without that
you wouldn't be able to perceive
anything and it's taken a lot of death
and struggle and tragedy to produce you
the thing that's capable of encountering
this immense chaos that surrounds us and
to transform it into habitable order and
then there's the idea - of course it's
deeply embedded in the first chapters of
Genesis which is a staggering idea you
know and and certainly not one that's
likely that human beings were made in
the M
of God both male and female were made in
the image of God and that's of course a
very difficult thing to understand
partly because the God that's referred
to in the in those chapters has a kind
of polytheistic element although it's an
element that's moving rapidly towards a
unified monotheism but it's not also
obvious to me why people would come up
with that concept because I don't really
think that when we think about each
other we immediately think God like you
know the notion that every single human
being regardless of their peculiarities
and strangeness --is and sins and crimes
and all of that has something divine in
them that needs to be regarded with
respect and that plays an integral role
at least an analogy an analogous role in
the creation of habitable order out of
chaos that's a magnificent remarkable
crazy idea and yet we developed it and I
do firmly believe that it sits at the
base of our legal system I think it is
the cornerstone of our legal system
that's the notion that everyone is equal
before God which is of course a
completely that's such a strange idea
it's very difficult to understand how
anybody could have ever come up with
that idea because the manifold
differences between people are so so
obvious and so evident that you could
say the natural way of viewing someone
is or human beings is in this extremely
hierarchical manner where some people
are contemptible and and and easily
brushed off as pointless and
pathological and and without value
whatsoever and all the power accrues to
a certain tiny you know aristocratic
minority at the top but if you look at
the way that the idea of the individual
sovereignty developed it's clear that it
unfolded over thousands and perhaps ten
thousands of years before it became
something firmly fixed in the
imagination that each individual had
something of transcendent value about
them and man I tell you we dispense with
that idea at our serious peril and so
and if you're going to take that idea
seriously then which you do because you
act it out because otherwise you
wouldn't be law abiding citizens right
you act that idea out it's it's it's
it's firmly shared by by everyone who
Ochs in a civilized manner the question
is why in the world do you believe it
assuming that you believe what you act
out which i think is a really good way
of fundamentally defining belief so all
right so so that's the sort of ideas
that there's this this god of tradition
and structure that's that's God the
Father who uses the Sun which is more of
an active force and and primarily
something that's verbal which I also
think is extremely interesting because
it's associated not with thought
precisely but with speech and I think
the reason for that is is that there's
something to speech that's more than
mere thought and I think part of the
reason for that is that speech is a
public utterance and at least in
principle speech is something that's
shaped by the existence of of everywhere
of everyone else at least across time
because when you speak you your speeches
is put forward in the world as a causal
element and it's also subject to
criticism and and and cooperation and
mutual shaping and so there's an idea
here too that speech is that that the
cognitive processes that bring habitable
reality out of out of uninhabitable
chaos have this collective and public
element which which is part of the
reason by the way that an advocate of
free speech let's say above all because
I don't think although it is the case
for example in the Canadian Bill of
Rights that every single right has equal
value that's the theory it's an idiotic
theory because it's absolutely
impossible for a large set of race to
have absolutely equal standards statuses
that cannot happen there's no way that
that can never work but that is the
legal judgment but I think it's a huge
mistake because free speech has this
while this divine quality let's say that
you can't escape from because it's the
thing that manufactures everything else
you know it's and so and I do think that
the the dream that you could think of as
encapsulated in the stories in Genesis
is is the dream by which human beings
dreamed up the idea that we would now
consider consciousness because you know
it took us a long time to figure out the
word consciousness it's not like it's
bloody obvious
it knows how many thousands of years or
who knows what struggles we had to
undertake to abstract out something like
consciousness and how we had to
represent that dramatically say or
symbolically or in a dreamlike fashion
before we could actually formulate the
term and and localize that to some
degree in people it's very sophisticated
so so John makes the case that well
there's there's an emanation of God or
an element of God the transcendent
consciousness it's something like that
that acts directly and in a sort of
living way with the with the underlying
potential of the world and I think that
that's phenomenologically accurate and I
do think that that's the way we regard
our lives because you know when you
think about it too we tend to think that
what you encounter when you're looking
at the world is the material world but
that isn't how you act you do act as if
you're in a place of potential and also
in a place of potential that you can
actually transform which is also
something extraordinarily strange you
know because we do treat each other as
if we're capable of bringing new forms
into the world in some permanent manner
right and we treat each other as if we
have free choice and free will and
perhaps we don't but it's certainly the
case that societies that are predicated
on the idea that we don't don't do very
well and societies that are predicated
on the idea that we do seem to do a lot
better
Plus people tend to get very annoyed at
you if you treat them like they're
automatons that lack freewill there's
something that people find very I would
say constraining slave-like about that
even you know that that's a demand that
you don't have actual autonomy and even
worse that you're not responsible for
your choices it's an insult to someone
to suggest to them that they're not
responsible for their choices you know
you usually to do that to someone from a
legal perspective you have to argue
something like diminished capacity right
well you're mentally ill or you don't
have the intellectual capacity or or or
you were or you were addled by some
substance or you had a brain injury or
something and that's why you're not
responsible for your actions otherwise
part of the respect that you get
to another human being is the assumption
that they're responsible for their
actions and some of that can be well if
you do something bad then you're
responsible for it but part of that too
is that if you do something good you're
also responsible for that and that also
seems necessary because I mean do you
really I mean it's got to be more
annoying than anything else you can
imagine to strive virtuously let's say
to produce something of extreme value
and then to be treated as if that was a
mere deterministic outcome and that your
your actual choices have nothing to do
with that I mean people find that sort
of thing extraordinarily punishing and
so I'm willing to you know I mean I know
that there are debates about all these
things and debates about free will and
debates about the nature of
consciousness but I'm trying to take a
clearer look at how people act and how
they want to be treated and then to
trace it back to these old ideas to see
if there's some if there's some
metaphysical let's say metaphysical
connection so all right so here's how
the here's how the book opens in the
beginning God created the heavens and
the earth the earth was without form and
void and darkness was over the face of
the deep and the Spirit of God was
hovering over the face of the waters now
this is a hard this is a hard what would
you call narrative section to get a
handle on because in order to understand
it properly you have to actually look
behind it so there are a lot of pieces
of old stories in the Old Testament that
flesh out the meaning of these lines and
I can I can give you a quick overview of
it one of the ideas that lurks
underneath these lines although you
can't tell because it's in English you
have to look at the original languages
and of course I don't speak the original
languages so I've had to use secondary
sources too bad for me but the the the
without form and void and the deep idea
you see that's associated with this
notion of endless deep potential so for
example the words that are
use to represent without form and void
or something like well one is toll I'm
going to get this partly wrong toll who
elbow who and another one is tailed and
it's important to know this because
those words are associated with an early
mess earlier Mesopotamian word which is
Tiamat and timeout was a dragon-like
creature who represented the salt water
and and timeout had a husband named AB
so and timeout adapts who were sort of
locked together and kind of a sexual
embrace and it was that locking together
of time at a nap sue and I would say
that's potential and order something
like that or chaos in order they were
locked together and it was that union of
chaos and order that gave rise in the
old Mesopotamian myth which is the Anu
male ish to the to the two being to the
old gods first and then eventually as
creation progressed to human beings
themselves and so there's this idea
lurking underneath this these initial
lines that God is akin to that which
confronts the unknown and carves it into
pieces and makes the world out of its
pieces and the thing that it confronts
is something like a well it's something
like a predatory reptile or something
like a dragon or it's something like a
serpent and I think part of the reason
for that and this this is this is a very
deep and ancient idea is that this is
where it gets so complicated to do the
translation is partly that is how human
beings created our world like we went
out beyond the confines of our safe
spaces let's say our space our safe
space is defined by by the tree or
defined by the fire and we actively
voyaged outward to the places that we
were afraid of and didn't understand and
conquer and conquered and encountered
things out there like like ant like
literally animals like mammoths and
snakes and predators of all sorts and it
was as a consequence of that active
brave engagement with the domain of what
we did not understand the terrifying
domain of what we did not understand
that the world in fact was generated and
that idea lurks be plea inside that the
opening lines of of genesis and it's and
it's a profound idea in my estimation
and i think
see I think also that the way our brains
are structured and this is something
that I'm going to try to develop more
today is that the ancient circuits that
our ancestors used to deal with the
space beyond which they had already
explored that would be home territory
that so that's that unknown territory
that's that's characterized by promise
because there are new things out there
but also by intense danger right because
we're prey animals especially millions
of years ago when we were very young we
had to go out there and encounter things
that were terribly dangerous and there
was a kind of let's say paternal courage
that went along with that and it was
that the spirit of paternal courage that
enabled the conquering of the unknown
and there's no difference between the
conquering of the unknown and the
creation of habitable order and the
thing is is that as our cognitive
faculties have developed to the point
where we're capable of very high levels
of abstraction the underlying biological
architecture has remained the same and
so I don't think that it's too much to
say at all that the the circuits that
you that engage you for example when
you're having an argument about
something fundamental with someone that
you love and so you're trying to
structure the world around you jointly
to create a habitable space that you can
both exist within you're using the same
circuits the extracted version you're
using the same circuits that our archaic
ancestors would have used when they went
out into the unknown itself to encounter
beasts and and and predators and and
geographical unknowns it's the same
circuit it's just that we do it
abstractly now instead of concretely but
of course it has to be the same circuit
because evolution evolution Ares is a
very conservative force and what else
would it be and this is also why I think
it's so easy for us to demonize those
people who are enemies because our
enemies confront us with what we don't
want to with what we don't want to see
and they and because of that our first
response is to use snake circuit or
snake detection circuitry on them and
that accounts for our capacity almost
immediate capacity to demonize and and
there's a reason for that it's not a
trivial thing first of all it's a very
fast respond
and second of all it's a response that
has worked for a very very very long
time and so you know one of the variants
of the hero and I would consider a
variant of the hero a like a fragment of
the picture of God is is the heroic
warrior who slays the enemy right and of
course that's not precisely a
politically correct representation of
the hero in modern times and well in no
wonder but it's still something that you
go watch in movies all the time and
admire right it's it's like this one of
the most how many plots are there
romance and adventure that's about it
and most of the adventure genre is well
there's some enemy that's lurking in
some form it could be human it could be
alien and someone rises up to go and
confront it maintain order you know it's
like there's no getting away from that
story and and if you don't have that in
your own life then you play a video game
where that's happening or you watch a
movie where that's happening you read a
book where that's happening and it
captures you even if you're atheistic
and your only religion is star wars you
know and and it's still well really
really right it really it still captures
your imagination and you act like
someone who's possessed by religious
fervor when you line up for three days
to be the first one into the theater you
know and all the while claiming that
you're atheistic to the core it's like
okay so this this without form and void
is this chaotic and it said it's hard
thing that it's a hard thing to get a
grip on you know what exactly this means
but I can give you another kind of
example of how you would experience the
formless chaos of potential in your own
lives and and even how the order that
you currently inhabit can dissolve into
that and you know in Dante's Inferno
when he outlined the levels of Hell so
Dante was trying to get to the bottom of
what constituted evil really in this
representation so it's a work of
psychology and he's thinking well there
are various ways to behave reprehensibly
but there's a hierarchy of reprehensible
behavior and there's something
absolutely the worst at the bottom and
and
Daunte believe that it was betrayal and
and i think that's right because you
know one of the things that enables a
long-term cooperation peaceful
cooperation between people is trust and
i would also say that trust is the
fundamental natural resource there's
been some very good books written on the
economic utility of trust for example in
societies where the default economic
presupposition between trading partners
is trust tend to be rich even if they
don't have any natural resources and you
can see that for example with what
happened with ebay which I think was a
kind of miracle because what should have
happened with eBay was that you sent me
junk and I sent you a check that bounced
right and that was the end of eBay but
right right exactly but that isn't what
happened like the default the default
transaction on eBay was so honest that
the brokers you could hire brokers to
begin with I can't remember what they
were called exactly but you could pay
someone a fee so that they would
guarantee the transaction so you know
you wouldn't send me junk and I'd
actually send you a payment and we'd pay
10 percent for someone to guarantee that
the default trade was so honest that
those things vanished right away and so
that meant that all this frozen capital
roughly speaking which were all the junk
that people had lying around that
someone else might want instantly became
money and the only reason that worked
was because people trusted one another
and so Trust is an unbelievably powerful
economic force may be the most powerful
economic force anyways if you have a
relationship with someone it's
predicated on trust and part of the
reason for that is that Trust is what
enables us to look at each other without
running away screaming and what I mean
by that is that if I trust you then I
don't have to take into account how
complicated you are because you're
horribly complicated to know I think
chimpanzee full of snakes that's what a
human being is and as long as you'll do
what you say you'll do then I can take
you at your word and your word
simplifies you and you can take me at my
word and my word simplifies you and then
we can act like we understand each other
even though we don't but then if that
trust is betrayed then all the snakes
come forth very very rapidly and so all
of you I suspect have been
trade one way or another and so what
happens if you're in a relationship with
someone and you trust them then you make
certain assumptions about the past and
you make certain assumptions about the
present and you make certain assumptions
about the future and everything's stable
and so you're standing on solid ground
and the chaos it's like you're standing
on thin ice the chaos is hidden the
shark beneath the waves isn't there
you're safe you're in the lifeboat but
then if the person betrays you like if
you're in an intimate relationship and
the person has an affair and you find
out about it then then you think one
moment you're one place right you're
where everything is secure because
you've predicated your perception of the
world on the axiom of trust and the next
second really the next second you're in
a completely different place and not
only is that place different right now
the place you were years ago is
different and the place you're going to
be in the future years hence is
different and so all of that certainty
that strange certainty that you inhabit
can collapse into incredible complexity
and you say well if someone betrays you
you think well okay who were you because
you weren't who I thought you were and I
thought I knew you
but I didn't know you at all and I never
knew you and so all the things we did
together those weren't the things that I
thought were happening something else
was happening and you're you or someone
else and that means I'm someone else
because I thought I knew what was going
on and clearly I don't I'm some sort of
blind sucker or the or the victim of a
psychopath or someone who's so naive
that they can barely live and I don't
understand anything about human beings
and they don't understand anything about
myself and I have no idea where I am now
I thought it was at home but I'm not I'm
in a house and it's full of strangers
and I don't know what I'm going to do
tomorrow or next week or next year it's
like all of that certainty that
habitable certainty it collapses right
back into the potential from which it
emerged and that's a terrifying thing
that's a journey to the underworld from
a mythological perspective and that is
really something worth knowing because
you know journeys to the underworld are
extraordinarily common in mythological
stories and you know like The Hobbit
going out to find a Smaug the dragon and
and get the gold as a journey into the
underworld and journeys to the
underworld how
and all the time and modern people don't
understand what the Wonderworld is
except that we've all been there and we
go there all the time and we go there
every time the solidity and stability of
the world that we've erected at least
partly through our speech is shattered
because while some sort of snake appears
that's another way of thinking about it
that it's a really good way of thinking
about it because you know no matter how
carefully you construct a little
habitable area that surround you there's
always something you didn't take into
account and there's always something
that can pop up its head and do you in
and make you aware of your mortality and
and age you for that matter or even kill
you and that's the permanent that's the
permanent situation of life which is
part of the reason why I think the story
of Adam and Eve for example is
archetypal it's because we do inhabit
walled gardens right because a walled
garden is half structure Society and
half nature that's what a walled garden
is and a walled garden is a place of
paradise and warmth and and and and and
and love and and and sustenance but it's
also the place where something can pop
up at any moment and knock you out of it
and I think part of the reason that that
story exists at the beginning of this
collection of books is because it
explains the eternal situation of human
beings we're always in that situation
we're in a walled garden or we bloody
well hope we are but there's always a
snake and then it's even worse because
if there is a snake or exactly the sort
of creatures who are going to do nothing
but go and interact with that state the
second that we can manage it you know
it's it's definitely the case that if
you want a human being to muck around
with something the best thing to do is
to tell them not ever to do it have
anything to do with it which is of
course something you know if you have
teenagers or even children or or if you
know anything about yourself or your
partner so these stories are trying to
express what you might describe as an
unchanging transcendent reality you know
it's it's something like what's common
across all human experience across all
time and that's what young essentially
meant by an archetype and you could say
well you know we tend
think that what we see with our senses
is real and of course that's true but
what we see with our senses is what's
real that worked at the timeframe that
we exist in right and so we see things
that we can touch and pick up we see
tools essentially that are useful for
our moment-to-moment activities we don't
see the structures of eternity
especially not the abstract structures
of eternity we have to imagine those
with our imagination and that's partly
what these stories are doing they're
saying well there's there's forms of
stability that transcend our capacity to
observe which is hardly surprising we
know that if we're scientists right
because we're always abstracting out
things that we can't immediately observe
but there are meta physical or moral
realities or phenomenological realities
that have the same nature that you can't
see them in your life by observing them
with your senses but you can imagine
them with your imagination and though
sometimes the things that you imagine
with your imagination are more real than
the things that you see numbers are like
that for example and there's endless
examples of that and I would say well
this is also a good way of thinking
about fiction because a good work of
fiction is more real than the stories
from which it was derived otherwise it
has no staying power right it's
distilled reality even though in some
sense it never happened it's like well
it depends on what you mean by happened
you know it's a it's a pattern that
repeats in many many places with
variation you extract out the central
pattern it's it's the pattern purely
never existed in any specific form but
the fact that you pulled a pattern out
from all those exemplars means that he's
extracted something real and I think the
reason that the the story of Adam and
Eve which we'll talk about in quite a
bit of detail today has it has been
immune to being forgotten is because it
says things about the nature of the
human condition that are always true it
can give you another brief example you
know like people have a lot of guilt you
know there's a line of social psychology
that claims that most people feel that
they're better than other people
like I just don't buy that that isn't
what I've seen in my life and maybe it's
I'm bit biased because I'm a clinical
psychologist and I see
more people who are overtly suffering
maybe then people do in general although
I'm not so sure about that you know
because you don't have to scratch very
far beneath the surface of most people's
lives before you find something truly
tragic and I don't mean the sort of
tragedy that you whine about I mean you
know your mother has Alzheimer's or your
best friend committed suicide or you
have a close relative with cancer you
have a sick child or you know there's
something wrong with you because almost
everyone has at least one really
terrible thing wrong with them and if
you don't hey you will so you know so
know that that so so that that tragic
sense of being is there with people all
the time and and and it's also the case
that not in my experience like I rarely
meet someone who says hey you know I'm
doing everything I possibly can I'm a
hell of a guy and I can't see how I
could possibly improve you know you meet
you meet someone like that you think
their narcissistic write would end
you're right and but but most people
don't feel that way they feel like they
could do a hell of a lot better than
they are and they're quite acutely aware
of their faults and they don't feel that
they're what they should be and you see
what happens in the story of Adam and
Eve as well as that when people become
self conscious at least that's how it
looks to me they get thrown out of
paradise and then they're in history and
history is a place where there's pain in
childbirth and where you're dominated by
your mate and where you have to toil
like mad like no other animal because
you're aware of the future you have to
work and sacrifice the joys of the
present for the future constantly and
you know you're going to die and you
have all that weight on you and to me
again that's just how can anything be
more true than that that's just as far
as I can tell that's just how it is
for unless you're naive beyond
comprehension there's something about
your life that that that is echoed in in
that representation and why it is that I
mean we're such strange creatures
because we don't seem to really fit into
being in some sense and that's also
what's expressed in the notion of the
fall we the existentialist said well
people feel like they have a debt that
they have to pay off to existence for
the for the crime of their for the crime
of the
being something like that and maybe it's
because we are acutely aware that we
have to offer something of value to the
people around us so that they can
tolerate us you know well we're going
about our business but it seems deeper
than that it's that human beings seem to
exist in a post cataclysmic world and
that's exactly also what's represented
in Genesis it's very interesting because
you know there's in the out of an EVE
story there's two there's two
catastrophes essentially there's the
catastrophe that occurs went out of an
EVE wake up which we'll talk about in
detail and become self conscious and
know that they're naked that and their
eyes are open right so that that's the
terminology that's used and to have your
eyes open means to have an an increment
in consciousness essentially because
eyes are associated with consciousness
for human beings because we're intensely
visual animals and so the metaphor of
having your eyes open means it's the
same as the metaphor of coming to
consciousness and as soon as Adam and
Eve come to consciousness they realize
they're naked and you know the classic
interpretation of that is that it has
something to do with sexual sin and I
don't I don't believe that I don't
believe that that's what it means
although they're elements about that
that are relevant it's more that to
realize that you're naked it's like
you're you know if you dream that you're
naked and on a stage in front of people
that's not a sexual dream man unless
you're some kind of strange
exhibitionist right it's if you want to
cover yourself up and get the hell off
that stage as fast as possible and so to
be naked in front of a crowd is to have
everyone it's to have the judgement of
the social world focused on your
self-evident inadequacies and that makes
people self-conscious and that's that's
a real human state it's associated with
neuroticism in the big five trade model
but people don't like that at all they
don't like having their fragility and
vulnerability exposed to the group it's
one of the two major fears of people
because one is social humiliation and
the other is something like mortality
and death and like your typical
agoraphobic
for example gets to have both those
fears at the same time because she
usually as she tends to believe she's
going to have a very spectacular and
exhibitionistic heart attack in a
public place and make a terrible fool of
herself while she's dying so and then
that's a good example of the two
archetypal fears that characterize
characterized human beings so so to me
and I said that I tried to approach
these stories as if I didn't know what
they were about because that seemed
right to me because their mysteries
their everything about them is
mysterious and why we have them is
mysterious and what the hell you're all
doing here is mysterious you know
listening to this lecture and so and
reading Hume because you and Carl Jung
was very very helpful in this because he
he faced these stories with the
beginner's mind and presumed there was
something to him that he didn't
understand given that they were at the
very bloody bottom of our civilization
you know which is historically perfectly
clear and that they came out of the
midst of time and he wasn't satisfied
with the idea that a Freudian idea that
God was just the father or the Marxist
idea that religion was the opiate of the
masses it's like if religion was the
opiate of the masses then communism was
the methamphetamine of the masses I can
tell you that so
so you know you've been betrayed by
someone and so you fall into that
underworld of doubt about everything and
it's a serious place to be in that
underworld a because not only do you not
know where you came from or who you are
where you're going that's bad enough
so that's the underworld itself but
there's a subdivision of the underworld
like the worst suburb which is I think
what hell is essentially from the
metaphysical perspective because you
know if someone really cuts you off at
the knees especially if they do it in a
malevolent way and and if you're going
to be betrayed and you really want to be
betrayed properly you want to be
betrayed by someone who's really out to
hurt you you know they just weren't
being stupid they were like after you
for whatever reason and then that's also
you plunged into that underworld space
and that's also when you start to nurse
feelings of resentment and aggrievement
and murder and homicide and even worse
you know because if people are betrayed
enough they start they start to obsess
about the utility of being itself and
perhaps go to places that no one would
ever want to go if they were in the
right mind and to and to develop a nurse
fantasies of the ultimate revenge and
that's a horrible place to be and that's
hell as far as I can tell and that's why
hell has always been a suburb of the
underworld because if if you get plunged
into a situation that you don't
understand and things are not good for
you anymore it's one step from being
completely confused it's only one step
from being completely confused to being
completely outraged and resentful and
then it's only one step from there to
really looking for revenge and that can
take you places that well that that
merely to imagine properly can be
traumatic and I've seen that happen with
people many times and I think that
anybody who uses their imagination on
themselves can see how that happens
because I don't imagine there's a single
person in the room that hasn't nursed
fairly intense fantasies of revenge at
least at one point in their life and
usually you know for what appear to be
good reasons it's no picnic to get
betrayed that's for sure that can shake
your faith in being but if it shakes it
so badly that you turn against being
itself that's certainly no solution
that's for sure all it does is make
everything that's bad even worse
so okay now so and God said let there be
light and there was light and God saw
that the light was good and God
separated the light from the darkness
and so that's that's another that's
another fundamental separation right
light and darkness those are those are
in some sense the two fundamental two of
the fundamental elements of our
conscious being because of course when
it's light we're awake and conscious
because we're diurnal animals and when
it's night well then we're asleep and so
our existence is bounded by light and
darkness we're up and alert when it's
light and that's partly because we're
highly visual animals right unlike most
animals because most animals you smell
we we use vision we're very strange that
way and vision is associated with
enlightenment and illumination and with
the breaking of the dawn with the coming
of the new day and all of that so and so
for light to be created is associated in
some sense with the emergence of
conscious being and so that's another
echo of that notion and they're the the
particular phrasing of the of the story
also is important because it's again
that God fed right so that's the use of
that word and that's the active element
of the structure that gives rise to the
gives order to chaos it's something like
that so it's it's like the spirit of the
structure manifests itself and produces
the fundamental divisions of experience
that's what's being presented here and
God separated the light from the
darkness he called the light day and the
darkness he called night and again again
the fact that things are named is also
very important so you see this later
with Adam because God gives Adam the job
of naming all the animals and it's sort
of like the animals don't actually exist
in some sense till they're named and
that's that's another indication of the
authors of the Bible's attempt to come
to terms with the fact that our
cognitive faculties and our ability to
speak have something to do with the way
that we task chaotic potential into
actuality right because we can't we
can't really get a grip on something
before we have a name for it which is
like for example you all have names and
everything that you encounter has to
have a name because before it has a name
it's just kind of
part of the blurry background in
something like that and you could say it
exists before it has a name but and
that's true but it's also true that it
doesn't exist before it has a name
because as soon as you give something a
name its nature changes and you've
transformed it into something that's not
so much mere potential anymore but it's
at least on its way to being actuality
it's on its way to being a tool and so
the act of naming is repeated
continually in the first chapters of the
Bible and the reason for that is this
continued emphasis on the importance of
consciousness and conscious articulation
and speech you know when speech is
really something that does separate us
in an important way from animals you
know like we haven't got very far
teaching animals how to speak the best
we've managed so far as some parrots
right there's gray African parrot there
is one of them that got up to about a
four-year-old level and that's
mind-boggling because like how big is
the brain of a parrot it's like that big
and that bloody thing could talk and so
that shows you how much we know about
brains but I know they're small and all
that but and we tried teaching
chimpanzees to talk and they could kind
of get somewhere with sign language
especially if you started when they were
young but they don't have the capacity
for language like we do and they were
never able to really pass it on to the
to the next generation which is
obviously a critical element of really
having that ability so human beings
we've used our linguistic capacity to
parse up the world in a new way and to
conceptualize it in a new way and you
know you can say that we're just like
ants on this little trivial planet out
on the edge of one of a hundred million
galaxies and that what's happening here
has no cosmic significance but that's an
arbitrary that's an arbitrary
proposition you know I mean we're very
complicated things and whatever's going
on on this planet has to do with
conscious reality and the
transformations of consciousness for all
we know might be the most important
things that happen everywhere there's no
reason to consider consciousness a
trivial phenomena I mean it's taken
three and a half billion years for you
to develop the brain that you've
developed and you and human beings are
amazing creatures I mean
just a casual walk through YouTube and
all those crazy kids that climb cranes
and do that what's that that ya parkour
man that stuff's unbelievable you know I
mean human beings are crazy crazy
animals there's almost nothing we can't
do and I'm very loath to assume that the
transformations of consciousness that
are described in the early in the early
stories in in the biblical accounts are
somehow cosmically trivial it doesn't
strike me that way and it's certainly
not self-evident and even if they are
cosmically trivial whatever that means
the rocks don't care what you think well
who cares what the rocks think first
they don't think so I don't see why
that's exactly relevant but even if even
if it's all the same to the cosmos which
is something that I doubt it's certainly
not just all the same to you you know
because your consciousness has a quality
and it matters the Heidegger for example
who's a philosopher who who's writing
sort of influenced me post-talk because
i recreated some of the things that he
had talked about in the 30s before I
knew much about him but one of the
things that Heidegger said was that the
fundamental element of human being of
human phenomenology was care he said
that that's the basic essence of your
being is that you care about things you
know and that's necessary that either
negatively or positively right you to
not care about something or to hate it
is still to be involved in care and so
even if the cosmos itself is is neutral
with regards to our existence we're not
and we're the only things that we know
of that are conscious and so while we
might as well go with that and there's
no reason see I can't help but think
that the constant attempts by people to
trivialize the nature of their own
consciousness has a dark side I'm a
psychoanalyst and so I always think that
way it's like well first of all if
you're if you as a being don't matter
then you don't have to do anything it's
a great justification for total lack of
responsibility and that that really
twigs something for me because you know
people who are bent let's say or
vengeful or angry are always looking for
a reason why they don't have to be
responsible for anything
it's a lot easier and so the notion that
consciousness is trivial immediately
allows you to wander down that path and
so I'm skeptical of those claims and I
also think that there's a deep hatred of
humanity that underlies those claims as
well and I read my youtube comments
sometimes you know and I've always been
I've always been
annoyed that you know because I've heard
like sort of radical clueless
environmentalists say things like planet
would be better off without people on it
which is something that like you just
cannot say that that if you say that and
listen to yourself
you should like go to a monastery for
like three years and never say a word
and have a shower every 10 minutes until
you've learned your lesson properly you
know you can't adhere a more genocide
'el phrase than that you know and of
course you always do it in a display of
your care for the world it's like well
if we just didn't have any people it's
like well we'll just line them all up
and shoot them with machine guns no it's
really sickening it's appalling and
there's a hatred for humanity that's at
the bottom of it and I mean you can kind
of understand why because we're messy
and you know we don't clean up after
ourselves and you know we're like raping
the rain forests and that sort of thing
but I do have some sympathy for people
because you know we're we're hell on
mother nature but she certainly returns
the favor so and that's a good thing to
remember you know a lot of what we're
doing is just bloody well trying to
exist with a relative minimum of pain
and we're doing our best to get you know
to get as good at doing that as fast as
we can and that's not an easy thing
there are lots of us and like life is
bloody complicated and the other thing
that happens too is again if you scratch
just beneath the surface of people and
this is something that's always you know
to me is being a kind of miracle is if
you talk to someone they're out doing
their job and maybe they're doing a good
job at it like some emergency room nurse
you know it's God there's a job for you
or maybe they work in palliative care
you know and you talk to them and you
find out they've got like four as I said
before serious problems in their family
and maybe they're diabetic to boot and
yet they haul themselves out of bed in
the morning and go take care of dying
people it's like good god people deserve
a bit of respect for struggling forward
and not always trying to make the planet
a worse play
when they're beset on all sides
constantly by you know unending series
of tragedy you think we could have a
little bit of sympathy for ourselves as
a consequence of that it's like we're
not all like rapacious greedy monsters
who are bent on just devouring
everything in our path you know it's a
little bit more complicated than that
so all right anyway so so well so let's
go to the next part of this here mmm-hmm
all right so God said let there be an
expanse in the midst of the waters and
let it separate the waters from the
waters and God made the expanse and
separated the waters that were under the
expanse from the waters that were above
the expanse and it was so and God called
the expanse heaven and there was evening
and there was morning the second day
well to understand that because what how
did that doesn't make any sense at all
really so I think I told you a little
bit about this before so the the the
world that's being created in this
particular account is a phenomenological
world there's a disc of land because if
you go out in a field and look around
you're on a disk of labs that's pretty
obvious and then there's a dome on top
of it it's more or less held up by the
mountains and rain comes down so there's
water above the dome because where else
would the rain come from and underneath
the ground there's fresh water you can
drill down and find out and then around
out there's salt water and so that's the
world and it's kind of an empirical
world because if you're a child and you
just go out in the field and you look at
the world that's sort of what it would
be like and so that's the world that's
being created and so one of the things
that is worth thinking about this is
something Carl Jung was very interested
in is that these old descriptions are
half geographical and half empirical so
sort of based on observation and half
psychological
so one of the things young was
interested in for example was astrology
but mostly for a psychological reason
because you know they're obviously there
are stars up on the dome and then when
you look at the stars you can imagine
the shapes of the stars and that helps
you orient yourself because as soon as
you can see shapes and the stars then
you can recognize the constellations and
you can orient yourself at night but
then the constellations become God's say
and the gods turn into a drama and so
and the drama comes from
then it's the projection of imagination
and so when Young was analyzing
astrology he was in that analyzing
psychology because he saw the
astrological narrative as the projection
of the human imagination onto the cosmos
and so when he was analyzing astrology
who was analyzing psychology and that
the same thing is the case with these
stories is that the world they they
describe is only it's not the natural
world like a scientist would describe it
because these people weren't scientists
they didn't have the technology in the
tool it was it was the way they were for
them it was the world for us it's the
way they saw the world and so we're
looking at the way they saw the world
and a lot of that psychology and we
share that psychology to a large degree
with those people so in this is
psychology but it's interesting to know
what the geographical substrate is so
that you can kind understand the stories
and I like this picture because that's
it's great from a psychological
perspective it's a very famous picture
you know so basically what you have here
is the world as we know it and there's
the dome with the Sun and the moon on it
and the stars and then if you look
outside what you know well then you're
out into this cosmic space right and
that's those are like the wheels of the
planets and the music of the spheres and
that's the ever-present Explorer who's
gone beyond the domain that he can
understand and is peering out into the
unknown as such and it's a psychological
picture it's like because you do know
some things and then outside of that
there are things you don't know and when
you're feeling brave you put a foot or
two out where you don't understand like
because there's frontier everywhere
right and if you're if you're feeling
heroic and you want to do something for
the world and you want to expand what
you understand you poke your head
through what you know and you take a
look at the that's the at whatever
structure is out there and you know he's
pretty smart because most of them is
still where it's safe and I would say
that's a good that's a good thing
because if you jump right out there well
then maybe you fall off the edge of the
earth and I wouldn't precisely recommend
that especially if you do it
accidentally and to me this is a
recreation of the of the Taoist yin-yang
symbol you know with the with the white
Paisley here and that's what
no in the dark paisley serpents really
there and the right place to be is right
on the line between them because you're
sort of got one foot where you
understand that gives you security and
then you know but it's kind of dull
because hey you know everything that's
going on there and that is what people
are like they don't want just security
Dostoyevsky said that in notes from the
underground a great great book and you
know he said I love this it was his
early critic criticism of the notion of
a political utopia he said look if you
gave people everything they wanted they
had nothing to eat but take and nothing
to do but sit in warm pools and busy
themselves with the continuation of the
species that was his his lives that the
first thing they would do well maybe
after the first week was like gold kind
of half insane and smash everything up
just so that something that they didn't
expect would happen so that they'd have
something interesting to do and it's so
right because you know that the utopian
notion that if you just had all the
material stuff you wanted that you'd
you'd be well what would you be what
what would you do would you just sit in
the couch and watch TV I mean you did
you'd be I don't know why you'd be
cutting yourself just for entertainment
in no time slot you know and that's the
sort of thing that people do and so
we're not adapted for security in Utopia
were adapted for a certain amount of
security because you know we are
vulnerable but mostly we want to have
one foot out where we don't know what
the hell is going on because that's
where your alert and alive and tense and
with it and and you know I think I
believe this and I believe it actually
has something to do with the hemispheric
structure of your of your of the
physiology of your brain is it because
the right hemisphere looks roughly
adapted to what you don't know and the
left hemisphere and this is a very this
is an oversimplification but a useful
one is adapted to the world that you do
know and the right place for you to be
is halfway between them because then you
can tell that that's what's so cool and
this tells you that this is actually
reality that's manifesting itself to you
you know that sense of active engagement
you have in the world when things are
working well for you you know where
you're where you should be at the right
time
you're alert and on top of things and
engaged and you don't have much of a
sense of time and the sense of the
tragedy of life sort of recedes and
that's when your that's when you've got
one foot when it's where it's secure in
one foot out in the unknown and your
brain signals to you that you're in the
right place by making what you're doing
meaningful and that sense of meaning is
actually a neuro physiological signal
that you've got the forces of the cosmos
properly balanced in your being at that
moment and that's why it feels so good
and then well what else could it
possibly be I mean you know our brain is
capable of looking beyond our vision
that's what it's for and that sense of
engagement there's no reason to assume
that that's anything but a real signal
and you can reduce it you could say well
the problem with being where you know
only is that you don't know everything
and that's going to be a problem in the
future and the problem with being where
you know nothing is that's just too much
man like you know you go into panic mode
and because anything can happen there
and you can't handle it so you've got to
mediate between those two things you
want to be secure enough so that your
physiology isn't revving out of control
and you want to be out there in the
unknown enough so that you keep updating
yourself constantly constantly
constantly and that's that's the place
where information flow is maximized and
you know that because that's where you
are when you're having a really
interesting conversation with someone or
you're gripped by a book or you're
really into a movie or maybe something
that you do as a you know apart from
your work or maybe even in your work
you're into it and that's because you
are in the right place at the right time
and your whole nervous system is
signaling that to you and I would say
that's the sort of place that you should
be all the time of course you can't be
because no one's perfect but it's that's
that's the recreation of paradise on
earth it's something like it because you
are in the right place at the right time
when that is happening subject to
certain what would you say restrictions
that we can talk about later well that's
what this guy is doing and and that's I
would say akin to the action that God is
taking when he's transforming the chaos
of potential into habitable being and
it's the sort of thing that human beings
supposed to act out and God said let the
waters under heaven be gathered together
into one place and let the dry land
appear and it was so God called the dry
land earth and the waters that were
gathered together he called seas and God
saw that it was good well that's an
interesting thing too because you know
there's this display written by a German
named Gupta I can never say that
properly it's johann van goe t-80 and I
can't say it but he wrote this play
called Faust and he wrote one part of it
when he was quite young and then Klaus -
when he was quite old and he has a
character in there Mestas tov ELISA
message da fleece is the devil and he
actually has the devil explaining
himself twice basically using the same
words which which I really like it was
very profound and basically Goethe's
Memphis dolly says you know he's the
adversary of the word that's a good way
of putting it because that's how it
works out mythologically he's the figure
behind the snake in the Garden of Eden
which is something we'll talk about more
but he has a he has a sophisticated
philosophy he's not just some random
troublemaker he's got a he's got a deep
philosophy and his philosophy is quite
straightforward and it's compelling it's
compelling and people are gripped by it
quite often far more often than they
think his philosophy is well look around
at the world like Ivan karamakov in The
Brothers Karamazov when he's trying to
disabuse his younger brother of being a
Christian monk Memphis awfully says well
look at the world I mean all we look
around the world it's nothing but a
bloodbath
it's just suffering everywhere
everything eats everything and people
die terribly and and they're cruel to
one another and the whole mass is
nothing but a constant hall of terrible
carnage and ruin and and and and and and
wreck he says it should be better if it
was never existed at all and that's a
very interesting that's a very very
interesting idea and I do believe and
I've seen this in people many times but
in the depths of despair especially when
you've been betrayed for example and you
wander into the wrong subdivision of the
underworld that
something that comes to mind if you know
you have a very sick child for example
or maybe your whole family is suffering
as whole families do sometimes an idea
is going to come to you it's like good
God who put this mess together and is it
really worth it is it really worth the
suffering suicidal people you know they
say no they say no enough of this you
know and you have to be pushed a long
way generally speaking before you'll
actually commit suicide you have to be
in very very desperate straits but your
answer under those conditions is that
being is such that it would be better if
it had never been and that's a very I
think I think it's a very it's a
terrible philosophy I believe because I
think what happens if you act it out is
that you make the very things that led
you to despair far worse and I can't see
that if it's reasonable to draw a
logical conclusion that suffering should
justifies your desire to make being end
that the answer to that can't be to
produce more suffering
it just doesn't make sense and my
observation has been that people who act
out the Memphis to--they liyan
philosophy inevitably make suffering far
worse and so and then that raises the
other specter of well do they want being
just diseased or they just out for
bloody revenge at every at any cost and
my conclusion has always been that is
that the mask is well being shouldn't
exist because it's too terrible but the
true motivation is I'm going to make
everyone suffer as much as I possibly
can before I say goodbye to this place
if you read the writings of people like
the kids who showed up the Columbine
High School they'll tell you exactly
that that's precisely and exactly what
they conclude it and then act it out
so anyways but in this God says that it
was good and I thought about that a lot
is like because the question is
something like well is it something
better than nothing because that's a
really good question you know and I
thought about two things in relationship
to that and one is one is well maybe it
depends on how it is that you are right
because it could be that there are ways
of being in the world to justify the
world and their ways of being in the
world that makes the world unbearable
and I believe that the narrative that
runs through the biblical stories is
precisely a dialogue between those two
types of BA and the optimistic part of
the story is that being requires
limitation and suffering there's no
escape from that but there are modes of
being that allow that to be perhaps even
more than tolerable perhaps there are
modes of being that allow that to be
good and it's a straight and narrow road
it's a very difficult road to tread so
so I think well that that's possible you
know I'm not an optimist by nature and
but that's that's one of the things that
I've conceptualized and read about that
I actually find plausible because it's
certainly the case everyone knows this
that there are ways that you can act and
make things worse
everyone knows that and so if that's the
case there has to be the opposite right
there has to be ways that you could act
that make things better and obviously
you can act in ways that make things
really way worse and so the question is
well are there ways that you can act and
make things really much better and I
think that's the question is can we have
our cake and eat it too
can we have the being that requires
limitation and suffering and also
simultaneously transcend that by our
mode of being and I believe that the
biblical stories and then perhaps not
only the biblical stories but the
biblical stories are the human imagine
one of the human imaginations best
attempt to address and answer that
question that's what the entire story is
about so the first of it is the
catastrophe of the collapse of
self-consciousness and the entrance of
humanity into history and the rest of it
is okay now we're in history now we know
that we're going to die we know about
our mortality we're conscious of our own
being is there a mode of acting in the
world that allows that to be justifiable
or maybe even more that allows that to
be triumphant and then I would also say
maybe it's worth finding out you know
that that's the other thing that's so
interesting because you've got this
short time on earth and there's lots of
things that are very very difficult to
contend with and and you have the
problem of tolerating yourself even in
all your insufficiency and one of the
things that seems to me to be the case
is that if you adopt a sufficiently
profound mode of being if you attempt to
do that then the mere act of lifting up
that weight is enough to justify
the fact that your insufficient and
mortal and and bound by tragedy and I
believe that and I believe people
believe that because if you watch how
people act they look for people they
admire and they do admire people right
it's a natural it's a natural phenomena
you see it starting with children be
children admire and then they imitate
and we look to people who seem to be
able to bear the burden of being in a
heroic manner and there's something
inside of us that calls to that and it
makes us want to to mimic that and to
follow it and I think that that's I
think that's the deepest and most
profound of instincts and I think it's
right and even if you're not so
convinced on the positive end you know
because it's more difficult to be
convinced of the positive you can
certainly be convinced on the negative
end because there are ways of being that
are so brutal and so reprehensible that
merely to read about them is enough to
traumatize you and I think that if
you're a person who hasn't lost their
soul completely you can't help but
encounter stories like that and shudder
away from them and you know Alexander
Solzhenitsyn
who who was the person who did most
announce the absolute horrors of
communist totalitarianism said that he
believed that the Nuremberg judgments
were the most important event of the
20th century and that was the judgment
at the end of World War two that there
were certain actions that no one was to
undertake no matter what their cultural
background was because they were let's
say crimes against humanity that there
was such a thing as universal evil and
you can debate that you know I mean and
people certainly have but the problem is
is if you debate that then you have to
say that there are conditions under
which the sorts of things that happen
say in the concentration camps which
would be the gassing of children after
their torture and and their their
forcible removal from their parents and
all the terrible things that went along
with that that that's just okay it's
just an opinion it's just something that
happened and there are circumstances
under which that's justifiable if
there's no transcendent good and evil
underneath that argument it's only a
matter of practicality and and and it
seems to me that that's that's not the
right conclusion to draw
that's how it seems to me and that's
what the Solzhenitsyn concluded when he
looked at the Nuremberg trials so the
notion that the notion that it was good
well even if you don't believe that and
you know because maybe it's not as good
as it could be I would say it's
incumbent on you as someone who
participates in the process of a
furthering creation to act as if it
could be good at least and to further
that with with all of your efforts
partly because what the hell else do you
have to do that could possibly be better
than that that could possibly justify
your existence more than that and you
know perfectly well if you if you have
any sense at all if you think clearly
about it at all is that that's what you
want to see in everyone else you know
it's you're you're desperate and maybe
you're cynical and now and then someone
appears that acts at least momentarily
like a light in the darkness enough
lifts your spirit up and gives you a
little bit of hope and maybe helps you
continue on well that's obviously a call
to being if it's a statement from your
old soul that says well there's
something about that that's how you
should be and maybe then well we get a
chance to to participate in what is good
I thought too you know well we'll leave
that for a little later and God said let
the earth sprout vegetation plants
yielding seed and fruit trees bearing
fruit in which is their seed each
according to its kind on the earth and
it was so and the earth brought forth
vegetation plants yielding seed
according to their own kind and trees
bearing fruit in which is their seed
each according to its kind and God saw
that it was good and there was evening
and there was morning the third day I
like that that's you see it's
interesting these old pictures say
because if you look here you got you got
this halo around God's head and you've
got to split again between night and
darkness and gods right on the on the
border between the two and that's the
Sun right that's what that's what a halo
is halo is the Sun or the moon sometimes
it's like a coin you know you have the
Queen's head on the coin and that's the
queen on the moon and it's silver and
it's a symbol of value because of course
the Queen is sovereign and
the moon is the sovereign of the night
sky and and gold of course is the Sun
and gold is pure because it doesn't mix
with other metals and it shines like the
Sun so it partakes of the Sun and god
partakes of the Sun because there's
something about whatever he represents
that's associated with consciousness and
illumination and enlightenment
it's that force of illumination
enlightenment that's it's right on the
border between these two sets of
phenomena and that's that's kind of what
that picture is trying to present and so
you know it's a metaphor that's one way
of thinking about it but it does again
allude to the underlying idea that
there's something about consciousness
that's integral to to being itself God
said let there be lights in the expanse
of the heavens to separate the day from
the night and let them be for signs and
for seasons and for days and for years
that's a that's a remarkable bit of a
bit of writing there too because you
just think about how bloody long it took
our caveman ancestors to look at the
night sky and start to figure out that
there were repeating patterns across
years that enabled them to mark the
seasons I mean I just can't imagine how
they figured that out it's that degree
of careful observation that it took and
I mean we know people figure that out a
long time ago because ah you know those
great megalithic monuments like
Stonehenge seem to be astronomical
observatories essentially and you see
the same thing with the pyramids I mean
people were looking at the damn sky
trying to figure out looking at God you
know because that's kind of what you're
doing when you're looking at the night
sky trying to figure out the regularity
and order in the universe and that's all
compacted into this little light you
know and let them be for signs and for
seasons to be oriented by the Stars
amazing and that let them be lights in
the expanse of heavens to give light
upon the earth and it was so and God
made the two great lights the greater
light to rule the day and the lesser
light to rule the night and the Stars
and God set them in the expanse of
heavens to give light on the earth to
rule over the day and over the night and
so there's an idea of sovereignty there
too right that that that there's an
analogy between the ruler and the and
the heavenly bodies that that light up
the that light up the darkness
essentially and that's a really
interesting idea too because it took us
a long time to come to terms with as I
mentioned last week to come to term
with the idea of sovereignty itself and
to decide what constituted valid power
it's not power it's not power its
authority and competence and not power
it's not dominance either it's more
sophisticated than that because the
people that you want to rule aren't
people who have power because power just
means I can hurt you and you can't hurt
me back that's that's not that that's
not what you need from a ruler even
though it devolves into that from time
to time what you want is the kind of
wisdom that illuminates the darkness and
to associate the sovereign with with the
heavenly kings of the light is a
perfectly reasonable thing to do from a
metaphoric perspective and that's an
ancient ancient idea you know and
another example of how we're grounded in
a dream that God set them in the expanse
of heavens to give light on the earth to
rule over the day in the night and to
separate the light from the darkness and
God saw that it was good another
emphasis on the fact that it was better
that there was something than nothing
and you know maybe you could maybe you
could consider that the Declaration of
the cosmos is something like well it's
better that there's something than
nothing and well how do you know that
and I guess the answer to that is that
there's something instead of nothing and
I know that that's not proof but but
it's still a remarkable fact that it
happens to be the case and no one does
know why that is so maybe we should go
along with it and see what we can do
with it you know and see how we could
make it better because we certainly
could if we were if we were really
committed to it and we shook our
resentment and our our anger and our
hatred and I know there's reason for all
of that because people do suffer
terribly but you know god only knows
what being could be like if we all
contributed it contributed to it to the
best of our ability god only knows what
we could conquer and what sort of
magnificent cities we could produce and
what things we could we could eradicate
from from from the suffering of the
world
and there was you know there's this guy
I read about this is amazing and I don't
remember his name but he he found out
about this worm that was called the
guinea worm and guinea worm is a really
horrible thing and you can look it up if
you want but I'll tell you a little bit
about it even though it's very
distasteful so I get any worm is a
parasite that lives in Africa and it
burrows under your skin and it's quite
long it's about that long and it's you
know about that wide and so it'll burrow
underneath your leg and then it's in
there you know and maybe it pokes its
little head out a hole which is one of
its delightful tendencies and then if
you want to pull it out it breaks right
because obviously because otherwise you
just pull it out it would be dead and so
it doesn't like that so it just breaks
off and many many people had this
horrible disease you know and it's well
you can you can't imagine what that
would be like because you're a part of
the 1% and you live in North America and
thank God for that but you know just a
little imagine you don't even want to
think about it let alone have it and he
went to Africa and wiped the damn thing
out it's like great you know it seems to
me the planets a lot better off without
any guinea worms on it even though
that's like guinea worm genocide talk
I'm still you know pretty happy about it
and so that was that was one guy who
thought well we don't need these things
and yeah well fair enough you know and
yeah well so good for him like you know
I mean he can die thinking that the
world's a better place than it was when
he first popped out and so so good for
that that NASA I think that's a good
that's a good aim you know I think is to
think that when you're on your deathbed
you can look back and think well there's
a little less suffering in the world
from here on out than there would be if
I had never existed and that's a lot
better than the opposite because it's
certainly possible say if you're Stalin
to ensure that there's a hell of a lot
more suffering in the world than there
would have been if you hadn't lived and
we perfectly well know that people can
manage that and that many many people
try to do nothing but in that but manage
precisely that so and it's hard for me
not to think about that as some sort of
metaphysical evil and I think it's the
right way to look at it and there was
evening and there was morning.the 4th
day so yeah you have the Sun here and
then the moon here as far as I can tell
yeah yeah actually I think this is the
moon over here but but so yeah that's
part of the Sistine Chapel which is you
know an absolutely remarkable and then
they know part of the reason - and the
part of the reason I'm teaching about
these biblical stories is because you
know I'm thinking because the humanities
have be decimated so badly and again I
think that has mostly to do with
resentment and hatred more than anything
else but I don't really think that you
can get a grip on the humanities and
what they have to offer without knowing
the biblical stories because they're the
they're the dream out of which the
humanities emerge and so unless you have
that background knowledge that dream
then there's all sorts of things that
are utterly profound that don't open
themselves up to you and Dante's Inferno
would be one of those and Milton's
Paradise Lost which is an absolutely
amazing piece of work I mean Milton
wrote it because he wanted to justify
the ways of God to man you know what an
ambition that is and I mean he was
serious about that he took the problem
seriously it's like it's the Memphis
dethalian problem is that well this is a
rough business that were involved in and
you know maybe maybe we should just give
it up I think the world the whole world
I think was deciding that in the 1980s
when we were deciding whether we going
to engage in the ultimate nuclear
catastrophe you know and we were very
very close to that a number of times and
I think it was a collective decision in
some sense on the part of humanity that
we might as well keep the whole awful
game going rather than just demolish it
but um but you know Milton he wrote
Paradise Lost - it's a dream again it's
a dream trying to explain the nature of
being and the nature of evil and you
can't crack the damn thing without
knowing the underlying stories and
that's really too bad because it's
utterly profound and the reason you need
profound things as far as I can tell you
need profound knowledge is because life
is actually a profound problem for
everyone I mean you can shelter back and
live a very conservative existence and
look like more power to you I understand
why you would do that but it doesn't
stop you from having to face the
ultimate questions of life right there
right there in everyone's face and at
least at some point your life and it
would be better if you could I think if
you could confront them full-on and
to deal with them properly and to be a
beacon of strength as a consequence of
vadas and it's and I think that wisdom
that's what the humanities are supposed
to teach his wisdom and wisdom is what
enables you to deal honorably with the
tragedy of life and I think you I can't
see how you could think that that was a
bad idea because they're going to be
times when you're in an emergency room
and you know prone to panic and to and
to cry and to break down and to and to
collapse and to be of no use to anyone
around you and that's not the right way
to be it's the right way to be in a
situation like that is to be strong and
reliable and I don't think you can do
that without being wise and you can't be
wise without putting yourself together
and without knowing something about
where you came from and what you're like
and that that's history and the
humanities and so this isn't optional
it's it's it's more necessary the man
does not live by bread alone and that's
exactly the issue here so you see these
magnificent works you know I mean
there's a there's it's not like
Michelangelo thought of this literally
you know he was a genius for god sake
and he's trying to get at something and
and he's trying to get at the profundity
of human culture I suppose that's why
you have this patriarchal figure here
and the cosmic role that consciousness
and tradition plays in being itself and
and it's ennobling and you know you
think people religious or not people
hundreds of millions of people come from
all over the world to Rome and go
through this little tiny chapel to look
at this it's something in it that
everyone needs to see you know it's not
just beauty it's more than beauty it's
it's that which feeds the soul and
everyone feels that even if they can't
explain it so and God said let the
waters swarm with swarms of living
creatures and let birds fly above the
earth across the expanse of the heavens
so God created the great sea creatures
and every living creature that moves
with which the waters swarm according to
their kinds and every winged bird
according to its kind and God saw that
it was good and God blessed them saying
be fruitful and multiply and fill the
waters in the seas and that birds
multiply on the earth and there was
evening and there was morning the fifth
day and God said let the earth bring
forth living creatures according to
their kinds livestock and creeping
beasts creeping things and beasts of the
earth
according to their kinds and it was so
and God made the beasts of the earth
according to their kinds and the
livestock according to their kinds and
everything that creeps on the ground
according to its kind kind right that's
kin right and to be kind is to treat
others as if they're your kin and so
according to its kind and God saw that
it was good that continually continually
represented over and over God said
that's the thing that calls being into
existence and God said it was good and
that's the fundamental judgment about
the nature of reality and you know one
of the things that happens in the in the
translation in the movement let's say
from the Old Testament to the New
Testament is God is obviously blessing
creation in the beginning of this story
and then you have Old Testament God and
like don't mess around with him right
because he'll give you a good smiting if
you get out of line there's no doubt
about that and he's kind of an arbitrary
character and you know lots of modern
people think well how could you believe
in a God like that and it's like when I
read that I think well that the Old
Testament people that is how they
thought they thought you better look the
hell out because life is really
difficult and if you step out line
you're going to get flattened and God
doesn't care in some sense whether you
approve of him it's like what the hell
does that have to do with anything
obviously you don't approve it's like
you better pay attention though because
otherwise you're going to be in real
trouble and not there's real wisdom and
that Nietzsche thought that it need to
really admire the Old Testament that's a
work of literature because he thought
that the representation of the divine
let's say as a representation of the
essential nature of being was
extraordinarily accurate in its
arbitrary and often cruel nature you
know it wasn't following a morality that
human beings could really understand as
moral he thought that was very realistic
and I like that interpretation but what
happens in the New Testament is quite
interesting because there's an
insistence all of a sudden in the New
Testament that you're supposed to act
towards God as if he's nothing but good
and that's such a strange thing because
you know you look at the world it you
think we're yeah really just good a well
the cancer and the earthquakes is kind
of hard to fit into that picture and you
know the terrible things that happen to
children and all about is very difficult
to square with the notion of a good God
obviously
but then there's the other underlying
idea is that if you act in that manner
it makes it more likely to be true it's
something like that and so it's that I
would consider that in some sense and
active both courage and faith it's like
you're going to make the case like God
makes at the beginning of the Bible that
being is in fact good now you can't see
it because well you get to see all the
things about it that aren't so good
that's not the point
it's a metaphysical presupposition
something like that it's a it's a
decision to act that way I'm going to
act as if being is good and to further
that and then the implicit idea is well
there isn't anything that there isn't
any way that you can make things work
out better than to do that and so
there's a courageous element to it which
i think is also expressed to some degree
in the idea of Christ's like voluntary
sacrifice of his own life his
presupposition was something like I'm
going to act as if God is good and I'm
going to play that out right to the end
and now that becomes something like a
divine pattern and I believe there's
wisdom in that because again I most of
the time that I've been wrestling with
this sort of thing I've always been
looking at the opposite I haven't been
studying good I've been studying evil
because evil is easier to believe
especially after the 20th century it's
like I think you have to be you have to
be blind not to think about the things
that happened in the 20th century as
evil and then some of the things that
happen we're so brutal it is just
absolutely unimaginable and well unless
you imagine it and and it's it's it's
right there it's part of the historical
record it's it and then I think well if
there's something that that's it's that
terrible it indicates as clearly as
anything can that there's also something
that's its opposite and that's whatever
it is that the farthest away possible
from that outcome now that doesn't mean
we can exactly say what it is because
it's easier to grip in some sense what
it means to torture and break and hurt
and then not to be able to conceptualize
so clearly how you would have to act if
you were acting in the exact opposite
manner but at least it implies that it
exists
and I see that pattern being laid out in
this dreamlike manner in the New
Testament and it has something to do
with well it has something to do and
this is for sure with the voluntary
acceptance of mortality because of
course that's the poisoned apple right
the fact that everybody looks forward
into the future to know that you're
finite and so is everything that you
love and it's very difficult for that
not to poison your existence and well
there's no getting out of it as far as
we can tell but there might be something
like switching your attitude to it and
you could say well that's the price you
pay for being and the heroic thing to do
is to accept that and not even to accept
it grudgingly to say alright I'm going
to go along with that I'm going to
accept that and I'm going to act
nonetheless as if being is good and then
I'm going to see how things turn out
it's something like that and God saw
that it was good and so it's an act of
courage right there there's an act of
courage that's associated with that
transformation of attitude and even with
regards to the notion that the world is
good it's a courageous attitude
especially given that there's so much
evidence that makes that conclusion
difficult to continually draw but the
alternative seems to me to be far worse
so there's God again with the Sun behind
him because he's associated with the
solar consciousness and he's creating
all these strange wonderful creatures
and and you know it's a and people say
well you know the idea of God as a an
old man in the sky let's say that's
primitive it's much more better to think
about it as a much more better Jesus
anyways it's more sophisticated to think
to think of the divine essence as a
disembodied spirit or something like
that but you know that's not so that's
not so obvious either because as I
already pointed out there isn't anything
that's more complicated than a human
being and and so the idea that the
divine is something that's at least as
complicated as a human being strikes me
as something that's actually quite
reasonable and I know it's a metaphor
although I don't know to what degree it
is a metaphor and it's also something
that's embodied and I really that's also
a very interesting notion
you know because it's become
increasingly obvious as we tried to do
such things as produce artificial
intelligence that it's very difficult to
produce an intelligence or perhaps a
consciousness that isn't embodied in
some manner it can't be just it can't be
just a spirit the spirit without form
and I think that's part of the reason to
why Christianity put so much emphasis at
the end of time on the resurrection of
the body because there's there's a
there's a drive in there to e Noble to
ennoble the idea of the body not just
the spirit the consciousness that floats
abstractly above the body but to say
that no you can't do that you can't just
shed that part of you that's heavy and
material so to speak and leave it behind
as if it's of no value you have to be
Noble and Noble that as well and that
idea is also linked to the note to the
representation of God as as a human
being and as a wise human being and as
something that's embodied and so at
least from the metaphorical perspective
I don't think it's reasonable just to to
brush your hands across it and say well
that's that's primitive because I don't
think it is I don't think it's primitive
at all and then God said let us make man
in our image after our likeness and it's
our because well this is a this is part
of the priestly story there's as I said
a number of sources for the Old
Testament and in the priestly version if
I remember correctly its Elohim that may
be wrong doesn't matter but the
precisely it doesn't matter because the
notion is is that the God who's in the
background of this story has a kind of
plurality of being right and it looks
like the idea of monotheism arose with
great difficulty across time because
there are lots of powers and the idea
that there's a power of powers was
something that it wasn't easy for people
to figure out you know in it because
what what constant across sources of
power or some kind of meta power but
it's hard to figure out what that is and
that's what's being represented by by
the movement as far as I can tell from
polytheism to monotheism it's it's the
first the observation that there are
powers that determine the destiny of
people at least in part that you
that you're subject to and then the idea
that there's something common across all
those powers that you can represent
partly say with the idea of the Sun
rising in the morning and fighting its
way out of the darkness at night and
that that's associated with
consciousness and sovereignty is very
very see one of the things that bothers
me about simple-minded atheism and I
would say the simple-minded atheism is
of the sort that regards these stories
as nothing but simple superstitions is
that it's very very poorly informed
because whatever these stories are
they're not merely simple superstitions
they weren't conjured up by some cabal
of priests to bamboozle the masses even
though they were used for that purposes
from time to time it's much much more
complicated than that they have a very
ancient lineage and they're tied
together with all sorts of other stories
and there's there's an emergent wisdom
in them and I think the right way to
view them is as the birthplace of
sophisticated philosophical ideas and so
you have to wrestle with these stories
you can't just and I said already that
I'm going to be as rational as I
possibly can in my discussion of these
stories and not refer to anything
metaphysical except when that's
absolutely necessary even though I don't
want to eliminate the possibility of a
metaphysical reality because I think
that's premature but but you have to
take the story seriously if you're going
to if you're if you're going to if
you're going to approach the problem
properly you can't just casually dismiss
them it's not appropriate and so so let
us make man in our image that's a very
interesting idea and like I said it's
not easy to understand how it was that
human beings came up with the idea that
us lowly creatures were so it with the
Mesopotamians for example and the Greeks
were like this to human beings weren't
godlike they were
the playthings of the gods right they
were they were just the gods just
tortured us for their amusement you know
love and hatred and anger and all those
powerful forces we were just
you're just playthings to the gods there
wasn't anything particularly divine
about us the notion that in some sense
we partake of the divine that's a
staggering idea and you don't want to
under underestimate the difficulty that
there was in abstracting that or the
utility of that idea for our current
mode of being
let them have dominion over the fish of
the sea and over the birds of the
heavens and over the livestock and all
the earth and over every creeping thing
that creeps on the earth so God created
man in his own image in the image of God
he created him male and female he
created them that's interesting because
there is more than one creation story in
Genesis and in this story males and
females are basically created at the
same time later Eve is extracted out of
Adam and we'll talk about that but not
here it's the two sexes are generated
simultaneously and they both carry
within them the divine stamp which is
very egalitarian and very appropriate
and I think unbelievably advanced that
that's what it looks like to me and God
blessed them well that's a good thing
and God said to them be fruitful and
multiply and fill the earth and subdue
it and have dominion over the fish of
the sea and over the birds of the
heavens and over every living thing that
moves on the earth and there's God
creating Adam and Eve and they're
looking pretty happy about the whole
thing and that's Michelangelo's famous
Sistine Chapel representation and
there's some cool things about this I
mean you got to wonder this this is a
side and I don't know if it's a credible
side but it's an interesting aside so
that's that's a form of credible what
the hell is God doing in this thing now
I mean what is this exactly and and so
there's been some interesting answers to
that and this is one of them so there
was a group of scientists about 20 years
ago that that were remarked on the
precise the precise analogy between this
structure and the brain bisected down
the middle and of course Michelangelo
was one of the first people who did
detailed dissections and so they felt
that that that Michelangelo had put God
inside the brain for some reason and
that seems to me to be associated with
the notion that there's you know there's
a there's an analogy or metaphorical
identity between the notion of whatever
God is and the structures that give rise
to consciousness and I think we really
underestimate the
degree to which consciousnesses is both
say miraculous and and not understood I
mean you know you you have what appears
to be an entirely material substrate yet
here you are aware itself aware and able
to generate the world merely in some
sense by looking at it it really is
remarkable and that consciousness is
dependent on on something that Wells up
from deep within that material substrate
that we don't understand at all it's
it's really a crazily remarkable thing
you know and you hear you hear a lot
about scientific reductionism but I'll
tell you something that's kind of
interesting in this it's a tangent to
you know the guy that discovered DNA I
think it was Watson and just walks in
and Crick but I don't remember who wrote
this book but one of them I don't
remember which one he believed the DNA
was so complicated that it had to come
from space he didn't believe it could
have possibly evolved on earth and so
like a lot of these people who are used
as exemplars of scientific reductionism
aren't like that at all when you
actually read what they had to say right
they they were very aware of the limits
of their own knowledge and I mean DNA is
something really quite spectacular Lee
remarkable it's an eternal substance
it's been around for a very long time
and the idea that we understand it is a
very stupid idea and I would say that I
would say that the same thing applies to
the brain like where we're scratching
away at the surface of something we
don't understand at all
so it's quite interesting I think that
and it maybe Michelangelo had enough
gall to do that it's certainly possible
I mean he had enough gall to do
dissections when the when the cost of
that was death you know he had this
robbed corpses essentially to go and do
it so he was he wasn't I would say not
particularly politically correct so so
that's kind of interesting and there's
another representation of the same thing
and that's a funny one I had to throw
that in I don't know how many of you
know this but there's there's there's
this joke in the atheistic atheist
community I think it might have be
started by Richard Dawkins but that
might be wrong that it was just as
reasonable to believe in the Flying
Spaghetti Monster as it was to believe
in God into that's a Flying Spaghetti
Monster by the way and and and so that's
that's called cuts by his noodly
appendage and anyways it's fine it's not
very sophisticated but it is funny so
and God blessed them and God said to
them be fruitful and multiply and fill
the earth and subdue it and have
dominion over the fish of the sea and
over the birds of the heaven and over
every living thing that moves on the
earth and God said behold I have given
you every plant yielding seed that is on
the face of all the earth and every tree
with seed in its fruit you shall have
them from for food and every beast of
the earth and every bird of the heavens
and to everything that creeps on the
earth everything that has the breath of
life I have given every green plant for
food and it was so and God saw
everything he had made and behold it was
very good and there was evening and
there was morning the sixth day thus the
heavens and the earth were finished and
all the host of them and on the seventh
day God finished his work that he had
done and he rested on the seventh day
from all his work that he had done so
God blessed the seventh day and made it
holy because on it God rested from all
his work that he had done in creation I
like that - you know one of the why did
a lot of counseling work with people who
were coaching work I guess with people
who were fairly spectacular ly
successful and they were usually
workaholics you know they're the sort of
people that were like they work 80 hours
a week non-stop
that's just what they were like and one
of the things we were always trying to
figure out was well how much should you
work because one answer is you just work
till you die right I mean he just
exhaust yourself and well that's not
that's not a good idea and then you have
to figure out why that isn't a good idea
it's got to be something like this is
that you don't want to do so much work
that the amount of work you do
interferes with the amount of work that
you could still do right because if you
work like mad for two weeks and then you
like you have to lie in a hospital bed
for a month that obviously isn't very
productive so you have to figure out how
much you can work diligently and then
how much you have to recuperate so that
you can get back up and work again and
you know that's people have basically
settled on something like this and given
it the divine imprimatur that that's one
way of thinking about it which is well
you can toil away for six days and no
wonder because you have to work but you
should rest at least one day out of
seven
otherwise well you don't appreciate life
that might be part of it and plus I
think it's more a matter of iterative
durability you know because one of the
things that defines morality is the
capacity to repeat something right so if
something is properly structured in a
moral manner then you can do it over and
over and over again without any
degeneration and so that's kind of like
a relationship if your relationship is
negotiated you can continue to negotiate
it and then you can have a relationship
that lasts for a long time you can do it
today and next week and next month the
next year you could maintain it across
time and this I would say is the wisdom
that's been a so that's been garnered
over god only knows what period of time
to say well look I mean even God needed
to take a break and appreciate what was
going on and it's not such a bad thing
for people to follow that that pattern
and that's a good thing for modern
people to know because we seem to be
even though you know we're very wealthy
by historical standards our capacity to
relax isn't exactly what it could be and
I think that's really hard on people
okay so I'm going to go over again the
idea of the attributes of God I talked
about that a little bit last week but I
want to return to it because I think
it's worth it's worth dwelling on a
little bit because we're trying to
figure out what it is that people were
trying to formulate when they were
formulating these representations and we
sort of come to the conclusion that
they're there there's an attempt to
abstract out the nature of power from
specific aspects of power and there's
some attempt to associate that with
consciousness as that which gives rise
to being itself and there's some attempt
to associate that consciousness with
something that has a cosmic quality
whatever that might mean and and it's a
statement that it has a cosmic quality
rather than rather than a discovery it's
a mere statement that there's that
there's something about consciousness
that has world generating significance
and also the implication that it's
associated with human beings as well
very and it's a very interesting set of
propositions and I don't believe that
they're simply refutable like it's a
perfectly coherent argument even though
it's primarily made metaphorically and
so then once again I want to build up
the
the framework of associations around the
idea of God one of the things that Freud
did when he was interpreting dreams and
it's quite useful you know so if someone
comes to me with a dream then I have
them tell me the whole dream and then I
get them to repeat it line by line and
then whenever they say a line and it
there's an object in it or a person or
something like that I ask them what that
makes them remember or what that thing
means to them or what comes to mind and
that's the associational technique and
it's predicated on the idea that your
memory works by association and you know
that if you're daydreaming you know you
go from one thing to another like a
conversation does and that you can take
an idea that's at the center of a web of
associations and by attracting the
associations you can kind of zero in on
what the idea might need and then you
expanded that by trying to he called it
to amplify the dream by thinking about
about narrative or literary or
mythological similarities that that
might be associated with the narrative
structure of the dream and and I think
often that can be unbelievably useful
you know and it's like the dream is an
idea that's trying to come to birth it's
partly formulated and then if you
discuss it and amplify it it's like you
can speed along its transformation into
a more articulated idea and the dream is
also something that because your brain
your mind is trying to with one foot in
the unknown it's trying to formulate
what's out there in the unknown and to
make it concrete but but it doesn't do
that in one fell swoop it doesn't just
take potential and turn it into two
articulated ideas it has to dream up
what's out there first projects its
imagination out there to get a handle on
what it might be it then that's
presented in the dream and if you
analyze the dream you can make it more
articulate and so that's what we're
going to do with the attributes of God
to build up the representational
structure a little bit so so the
hypothesis is that God is an abstracted
ideal formulated in large part to
dissociate the ideal from any particular
incarnation or man or ruler and the
underlying idea there too is that when
the ruler becomes the ideal the state
turns into the biblical Egypt and the
biblical Egypt is a tyranny
and so there's a very very solid idea in
the Old Testament that I think took
people god only knows how long to figure
out that if you transformed if you
confuse the notion of sovereign
sovereignty with the current sovereign
then your culture immediately
degenerated into totalitarian state and
turned to stone and that was deadly then
you were slaves and then the thing was
going to collapse as well like no matter
how big and grandiose as soon as the
ruler became the concrete incarnation of
the ideal there was no distinction
between the man and the divine notion of
the ideal then the society was doomed
and I think that that's a less I think
that's what I think that's true it's
just as simple as that and I think we
saw more than enough evidence of that in
the 20th century and we're certainly
seeing the same thing repeating itself
now when the ruler becomes the ideal the
state turns into the biblical Egypt and
the biblical Egypt is the archetypal
tyranny so what is God like well from
the Christian perspective there's three
elements one is seems to have something
to do with tradition and so that's God
the Father and that's partly the
embodiment I would say of the human
being because that's an ancient ancient
thing and it's also partly the
embodiment of the tradition of human
beings which is also a very ancient
thing and that's the structure as I said
it's the structure that consciousness
emerges from that enables us to grapple
with the unknown as such and then
there's there's the the intermediary
between that and and Christ say that's
the holy spirit that's that bird and
that's that's the spirit in a more
abstracted sense and I would say that's
probably as close as Christianity ever
got to the notion of consciousness as
such you know disembodied consciousness
something like that and then there's the
notion of the suffering individual and
and that's that's a very complicated
idea and it's something like in order
for so there's this idea an old idea and
I believe this was originally a Jewish
idea that a something with the
attributes of God omniscience
omnipresence and omnipotent lacks
something
so it's like a Zen koan it's a really
interesting idea what won the world can
something like that lack and the idea is
limitation so something that's
everything lacks limitation and that's
got that idea like when I first
encountered that just blew me away I
thought it was such a such a brilliant
brilliant realization that there are
advantages to not being able to do
things because partly because it gives
you something to do I suppose that's
that's a big part of it right is if you
had everything you wanted that at every
moment at your fingertips well that
that's there's there's nothing there's
no story and it's funny you know because
that happened to Superman you know the
the cartoon character by the 1980s he
could juggle planets and you could
bounce like hydrogen bombs off him and
be fine and it's like everyone got bored
because well what we're going to do to
Superman like you love a hydrogen bomb
atom and he just brushes it off and like
combs his hair and that's the end of
that and the whole cartoon series
basically died because he didn't have
any flaws there's no story without the
limitation and I think that's an
absolutely remarkable idea and so part
of the notion of Christ and this is
something that I puzzled over for a long
time and I learned a lot of this from
young is that there's IDN Christianity
that there's consciousness as such which
which in some sense is eternal it
stretches from the beginning of the time
to the end of time but it's this
abstracted notion but it lacks a certain
kind of reality because it's not
instantiated somewhere not it's not
instantiated in a specific time and
place in history and so the idea of the
Sun that the third part of the Trinity
or one of the three parts of the Trinity
is the notion that tradition and
consciousness as such also has to be
embedded in history in a particular time
in place and so there's the archetypal
embeddedness and that would be the
Incarnation and that's the perfect man
right who accepts his mortality and acts
in a virtuous manner but it's in a it's
a it's the archetypal story of every
individual as well and you know there's
a very strong strain in Christianity I
would say this is more pronounced in
Orthodox Christianity that the that the
purpose of that the proper path of life
is to take the tradition let's say and
the spirit that's associated with
consciousness as such and to act it out
in your life in your own personal life
in a manner that's analogous to the
manner in which Christ acted out in his
life and what that means in part is the
acceptance of the tragic preconditions
of existence and so that's partly
betrayal right betrayal by friends and
by family and by the state and it's
partly punishment for our sins that you
did not commit as well as the ones you
did commit and sometimes that's just a
relief but you know the arbitrary nature
of justice and also the fact of finitude
and the notion is is that your duty
let's say and the way to set things
right in the cosmos is to accept that as
a necessary precondition for being and
to act virtuously despite that and
that's a very very powerful idea as far
as I'm concerned and I'm also you know
the world is a weird place and I've seen
some very strange things in my life and
one of the things that I've seen is that
you know I've dealt with some people who
are very let's say that they weren't on
a good path let's put it that way and
one of the things that was really
interesting about being around people
like that it was like almost like they
were surrounded by a gravitational field
of sorts I'm speaking metaphorically
obviously and their worldview was so
warped and twisted that if you came
within contact of them you all of a
sudden started to play a part in their
drama and it was almost inevitable they
would maneuver and manipulate and
interpret in a way that made you into
the villain in their story no matter
what it was that you wanted to do and
unless you've encountered something like
that and many of you probably have you
don't know how powerful a pole that is
and so it's certainly possible that
someone can act in a like like like a
gravitational odd object and bend things
around them to fit their narrative
they're unhappy and tragic narratives
but I've seen the officer - you know
we're people who were aiming upward with
the best of their ability and because of
that they had a positive effect on the
people around them and and that that
that that and that ordered things around
them in profound ways and I think it's
an open question
the degree to which the cosmos would
order itself around you properly if you
got yourself together as much as you
could get yourself together like I mean
we know that things can go very very
badly wrong if you if you do things very
badly wrong there's no doubt about that
but the converse is also true if you
start to sort yourself out properly and
then you have a beneficial effect on
your family first of all that's going to
echo down the generations but it also
spreads out into the community and we
are networked together you know we're
not lit we're not associated linearly we
all affect each other and so it's an
open question the degree to which acting
out the notion of the notion that being
is good and the notion that you can
accept its limitations and that you
should still strive for virtue it's it's
an open question how profound effect
that would have on the structure of
reality if you really chose to act it
out and I've seen things as I said in my
life that indicate that I do believe
there's a metaphysical element to life
as well as the rational practical
element and I think there are times when
those two things come together and I've
seen that happen and so I don't think we
know the limits of virtue I don't think
we know what true virtue could bring
about if we if we aimed at it carefully
and practically and so the notion that
there's something divine about the
individual who accepts the conditions of
existence and still strives for the good
I think that that's a idea that's very
much worth paying attention to and I
think the fact that people have
considered that idea for at least 2,000
years quite seriously is also an
indication that there's there's at least
something to be thought about with in
relationship to that so that's kind of
the trinitarian idea same idea there and
you see this is it's interesting too
because you have here you have God the
Father essentially who's coming out of
this strange you see this isn't the sky
exactly and you see this very often in
these old pictures it's not exactly the
sky whatever the heaven was that that
the people believed in it's something
that's it's like the sky opens and
there's a dimension beyond the sky it's
something like that and I want to show
you this too just to show you that this
isn't only a Western conception you know
when it has something to do with mystic
experience because there's there's a bar
to satisfy it kind of looks like he has
a hat but that's not a hat that's a
whole bunch of bodhisattva's going back
to Eternity right and this hole in the
sky here is like a hole into time and
these things are recurring across time
it's the eternal recurrence of this of
this redemptive archetype and the sky
opens up and and you can see that thing
recurring and recurring and recurring
same ideas basically that's the blue
Buddha who's a healing who's a healing
entity sitting in a mandala which is
like a representation of paradise and
it's the same idea it's like reality
opens up and reveals this image of
perfection and so it's a well it's a
universal conception and and well I
think it's a representation of the
possibility of the metaphysical and the
physical coming together and in some
sort of in some sort of communication
it's something like that anyways and I
mean you have to remember that there's
absolutely no doubt that people have
metaphysical and religious experiences
that's an absolute fact you can induce
them chemically you can deduce them
electrochemically lots of people who
have epilepsy have epileptic prodromus
that are associated with divine
enlightenment so does the S key for
example he had he had epilepsy and that
was really I think one of the things
that made him a great author because and
Dostoyevsky would have this feeling that
he was going to have an epileptic
seizure and he said that the feeling for
him was that the world was opening up
and he was becoming more and more and
more enlightened and he was just on the
verge of grasping the essence of
existence and then he'd have an
epileptic seizure and for the subjective
feeling was that that much knowledge was
just too much for him to bear well you
know you can say well that was a
neurological abnormality and fine you
know but God he was Dostoyevsky you know
and so you can't just brush that off so
yeah well so that's the Trinitarian idea
fundamentally and if this notion here is
the notion that well the crosses crosses
a funny thing because the cross marks
the center you know and it's an X and
the X is the center of the world like
the X that the Cathedral is and it's the
center of the world it's where you are
because as a consciousness you're the
center of the world and that center of
the world is a place of betray
no and suffering in limitation that's
that's exactly what it is and the
question is well given that and given
the fact that you know it what the hell
are you supposed to do about it and what
that represents
I believe that's coil with that
representation implies is that you're
supposed to voluntarily accept that and
then move forward um well in good faith
and with courage that's the notion and
that you're supported you're supported
by your tradition and that's why you
need your tradition to that's why you
need to be embedded in your tradition
because without that without the support
let's say of your father and I mean that
both practically and metaphysically
without that behind you without the
knowledge of you as a both a biological
and the cultural creature without that
depth of knowledge you can't hey you
don't have the courage to do it because
you don't know what you are what you
could be and so without that because
you're a historical creature you know
what students ask me sometimes why study
history it's like well because history
is about you that's why it's like
history tells you who you are you can't
tell who you are because you only live a
little while how the hell can you figure
out who you are so you need all this
collected wisdom and all this dream like
information and all this mythology and
all this narrative to inform you about
what you are beyond what you see of
yourself and you know you're pummeled
down and people picked on you and
there's 50 things about you that are
horrible and you know you've got a
self-esteem problem you're sort of
hunched over and you've got all these
problems you know and so it's not easy
to see let's say the divinity that lurks
behind that and unless you're aware of
the heroic stories of the past and the
metaphysics of consciousness let's say I
don't think that you can have the
courage to regard yourself as the sort
of creature that can stand up underneath
that intense existential burden and move
forward in encourage and grace and of
course that's part of the reason that
I'm talking about these biblical stories
and it's nine-thirty so we're going to
have to stop
[Applause]
[Music]
okay so we're going to stop exactly at
10:00 tonight because that that's the
deal with the theater people and so and
besides I'll be out of anything
intelligent to say by that point
certainly so while it needs to go
through one story so that was good
[Applause]
[Music]
okay let's give everyone like to you
know just a few seconds to settle down
and and everyone who wants to leave can
leave so thank you for all for coming by
the way I'm constantly amazed at this
you know everybody comes and listens to
this because you know it's just well
strange let's put it that way so so far
it's been fun though so that's good okay
let's go I hope that works hi dr.
Pearson I was a raised Catholic and
anytime there was a bit of a an inherent
contradiction let's call it in the
document to the Bible it would be
referred to as a mystery and there's one
mystery I've always kind of wondered
about and it's very important to Genesis
how do you how do you deal with a
perfect God or the conception of a
perfect God who by nature is incapable
of an imperfect design sorry are
incapable of a perfect design so what I
mean by that is many religions present
for example good and evil as separate
deities that pre-existed simultaneously
what's interesting though Christianity
is that Lucifer the embodiment of evil
in the Christian religion is an
outgrowth of God and is sometimes Milton
for example presents him as a rebel
against his interpretation of God's
tyranny right another example you know
we had didn't touch on even today but in
Paradise a supposedly perfect Garden a
perfect design is infiltrated again by
that evil outgrowth of a so-called
perfect God so from a psychological
perspective do you think there's a
significance to this presentation of
perfection yet the contradictory flaws
that are sort of naturally part of that
perfection quote-unquote oh so good
that's a good simple question we're
starting good see young Carl young he
was kind of manichaean in his approach
and he tended towards thinking that evil
in some sense was a separate entity you
know and I thought about that for a long
time because there's a potency about
evil that just can't be brushed
way and I mean I mean this most
practically as I've said for people in
my clinical practice I've dealt with
many people who are touched by
malevolence and there's no other way of
stating it properly and this happens a
lot to people who have post-traumatic
stress disorder like they encountered
someone that wanted to hurt them for the
sake of hurting them you know it wasn't
some misunderstanding you can forget
about that it wasn't that at all and so
to to deny the reality of evil in some
sense I think is the ultimate in naivety
even though it's a word that you won't
hear used for example very often in
universities anymore but that I just
thought just I just can't understand
that at all but but I thought about that
a lot and and so I'm going to kind of
answer that question by hitting it
scattershot
the first thing is is that there's an
idea and that this happens in Milton
this cut that comes across in Milton
that distance from God is hell right
that hell doesn't actually have any I
know it's ambivalent in Milton but but
the fundamental claim seems to be that
the farther you get from God the more
it's hell and then there's another idea
that Milton's Satan who's Lucifer the
bringer of light right he's God's
highest angel gone most wrong and I kind
of think about him as the spirit of
rationality of intelligence it's not
because I'm not an admirer of
intelligence because hurray for
intelligence but one of the things that
that Milton seemed to cotton onto before
the rise of modern totalitarian States
was that intellect has the capacity to
fall in love with its own creations and
to elevate them to the highest place
which is basically a totalitarian claim
it's like what I know is everything that
needs to be known and if it was only
manifest in the world the world would
become a utopia and I also think that
we'll talk about this next week I also
think that that's the core idea behind
the Tower of Babel remember the Tower of
Babel is raised by human beings so that
the pinnacle will hit heaven and so it's
the idea that we can build a structure
that makes the transcendent unnecessary
and so ok so there's those two things
then there's there's an idea of free
will that's associated with it too and
it seems to me that in order for there
to be good there has to be evil and so I
I think the answer is something like
this is that in order for there to be
being there has to be limitation in
order for their good to be good there
has to be the possibility of evil I
think the right path is to exist such
that the possibility of evil remains
open but that you choose the good and I
don't think that evil per se is built
into the structure of the world I do
think that that's human I think that
evil is human and I think it's
understandable
I did a lecture that's online about the
distinction between evil and tragedy and
tragedy seems to be built into the
structure of the world and perhaps you
can blame God for that I mean it doesn't
seem to me that it's your fault that
there earthquakes for example but but it
is all not obvious to me either that
it's tragedy that takes the spirit out
of people I think that human beings are
actually equipped to deal with tragedy
but we're not equipped to deal with
malevolence that destroys people and so
I think that I think that metaphysically
speaking the world is structured so that
people have a choice between good and
evil and that so then the next question
is why do we have a choice and that
that's where my knowledge runs out I
don't I don't like the alchemists for
example speculated that and then the
Orthodox Christians also followed this
line of reasoning is that human beings
in some sense are furthering creation by
our actions and by our choices and I
think there's something to that it's
like it's like creation is unfinished in
some sense and that we're participating
in in moving it in whatever direction we
it is that we want to move it and part
of that is that we have freewill and
part of that is that we have the choice
between good and evil and that's also
it's all associated with with the
significance maybe the cosmic
significance of our lives and I blood
that strikes me as plausible and and I
think that the weight of responsibility
that people feel existentially is an
indication of that so that's about the
best I could do with that so and it
seems the way you're describing it it's
built into at least the text that you
presented because one of the other
things I had noticed was God
consistently describes creation as good
right well rates light it's good he
creates dark it's good
laughter he creates things in ounces
that he creates man and woman and
announces that they have dominion ya
over those things and can use them yeah
and it might be something lost the
translation but that is described as
very good as soon as that Dominion is
brought into it yes yeah it might speak
to that notion of furthering yeah great
and here's something interesting too and
we'll develop this a lot is that you see
when Adam and Eve eat the fruit
the snake gives them the fruit the first
thing that happens is their eyes are
opened okay and to me that means that
while they've woken up right there's
been an increment in their consciousness
and the next thing that happens is that
they recognize that they're naked okay
and to recognize that you're naked is to
recognize that you're vulnerable and
human beings are strange creatures it
because most animals are like this and
they're protected but not us like our
most vulnerable parts are displayed for
harm and for everyone to observe right
so we've got that sort of bipedal
self-consciousness built into us but
what's really interesting is that when
Adam and Eve realized that they're naked
it's the same moment that they know the
difference between good and evil and
that our God that just that just I just
ground away on that for years trust so
what the hell's what's going on here
what's the relationship between
consciousness knowledge of nakedness and
the knowledge of good and evil and then
I think I think I figured it out I think
I think it was that you see when you
know that you're vulnerable and they
also develop knowledge of death right so
there's deep knowledge of vulnerability
and they get embarrassed about that they
cover themselves up right so that's
culture so it's a very profound shock
for them to recognize that they're naked
it even makes Adam hide from God many
developed the knowledge of good and evil
well I think it's because you see human
beings have this peculiar capacity that
no other creature has which is I know
how I can be hurt because I'm aware of
my own limitations painfully aware and
now because I know how I can be hurt I
know how you can be hurt and I can take
advantage of that and that's I think how
evil enters the world that's what it
looks like to me it's like I got this
expansion of knowledge it says in
Genesis that that that gives people
another attribute of divinity knowing
the difference between good and evil it
has nothing to do with animals and
nothing to do with Adam and Eve prior to
having your eyes open but that the
cosmos switches when that self
consciousness manifests itself and
that's when the possibility of evil
enters the world it's something like
that and that's also echoed by the
intimate relationship between the snake
in the Garden of Eden and Satan which is
we're going to because that's what
that's a very strange associations like
this snake also becomes the adversary of
being and I think that's I'll jump very
quickly into that but I think that's
because you know there's the snake that
bites you in the jungle and then there's
the snake that lives in your enemy and
then there's the snake that lives in
your family if you if you banish the
enemy to the Netherlands and then
there's the snake that lives in you if
you remove yourself from your family and
that snake that's in you right that's
that's a that's a psychological
phenomena that's equivalent to
transcendent evil itself the thing that
inhabits every single person that's why
there's that association between the
snake and Satan and that's why I think
that people have this it's associated
with their knowledge of ulnar ability
that gives us this constant capacity for
for evil being imagine if your medieval
torturer
you know I mean people don't generally
imagine that sort of thing but but but
people were maybe evil torturers and
they were very good at what they did and
the only way that you could be a
torturers to know what would hurt you
right and so you exploit your own
vulnerable exploit the knowledge of your
own vulnerability to bring pain into the
world and I don't think that you can lay
that precisely at God's feet now people
have been arguing about that for a very
long time but but my question the
question for me that arose from that is
all right fine like tragedy you can lay
that at God's feet well if we didn't
bring additional evil into the world
could we tolerate the tragedy of being
without becoming corrupt and I think
generally the answer to that is yes
because I've seen people react quite
heroically to the arbitrary burdens of
their life but malevolence may I'm not
late that lays them low it lays them low
and it seems to be to be nothing but a
destructive force and I do believe as
well and I think you see this in the
Cain and Abel story that the root of
malevolence is the
desire for revenge against God for for
creation itself and I mean I've read
terrible things written by terrible
people trying to get to the bottom of
things and I mentioned to call them
bunny killers for example and it's clear
all you have to do is go read what they
wrote what they were doing was taking
revenge against God they knew that if it
wasn't unconscious that they've been
dwelling on this for months plotting
their revenge and it was revenge against
being itself for the crime of being so
thank you hi doctor you'd said the when
God saw that it was good you read that
as potentially well I might be better
than nothing
and the story in Genesis it's bracketed
by days which aren't necessarily literal
days young the original word you know
but it's also bracketed by and he saw it
was good you know at the end of the day
so my question is is there something
more profoundly happening there between
this profundity of speaking into
existence the way you know the start is
to this observation the seeing that it's
good and are we is God modeling
consciousness is there a little more
there for us to grapple with okay so so
more for us to grapple with in what way
in the sense that we have this amazing
this insight of speaking things forth
but you'd also comment on consciousness
as until something's observed or until
so there until it's seen so when God
sees that that creation was good is
there there's kind of this bracketing
between the bringing forth through the
spoke we you know through the word
through Jesus okay okay that's good I
see what you mean okay well I think I
think what that is is that I think okay
so it's perfectly reasonable from an
archetypal and psychological perspective
to consider the idea of the word
equivalent to the spoken truth
I mean price makes that claim in the New
Testament that he's the truth right
and embodied and so then you can
logically you can derive from that the
idea that if things are spoken into
being through truth then they're good
and so yeah I think that that
association exists and I think that
that's well I also think that that's
that's that in some sense the deepest
claim of faith I believe that because I
think that I think you have to make a
decision in your life as far as I can
tell and I think Kierkegaard knew this
more clearly than anyone else I've ever
read and that is that if being is good
then an honest relationship with being
also has to be good and then if you have
an honest relationship with being then
you're going to speak the truth and then
I think what you have to decide is that
speaking if you speak the truth then
what happens is good regardless of what
happens and that that's that that's the
rub of faith and I think that's
something that Kerry could guard
wrestled with you know and I mean I'm
trying to think if I can provide an
example about about that and anything
and easily and quickly well I guess it's
partly because it's partly because you
can live your life two ways you can you
can you can use your language to
manipulate you can use your language as
a tool to get what you want but the
problem with that is that that assumes
that you know what you want and that
you're right and that's a problem
because there's lots of things you don't
know and if you get what you want you
may find a that you didn't really want
it and be that you're not the person
that started the journey towards that
that happens a lot to people especially
when they use their language in a
manipulative way and so the alternative
seems to be and I think this is one of
the lessons for example that's laid out
in the movie Pinocchio which happens to
be a kind of archetypal favorite of mine
is but part of the act of faith so let's
say and then I wouldn't say Christian
faith necessarily I would say faith in
being itself is is the decision it's
like the decision that God is good the
decision is there's no better way to
bring better being into being than to
speak the truth and I do think that's
accurate I think that's a very wise
observation I think that's echoed in
that for
story first of all the active speech and
second the observation that the
consequence was good so yeah yeah thank
you
[Music]
good morning citizen Peterson first I
have a bunch of questions and the one
that have them answered immediately like
you have a post on Quora in which you
encourage all children to incur
skateboarding injuries but but also
stated in this post well you wrote that
do not try to rescue someone who does
not want to be rescued and be very
careful about rescuing someone who does
and can you reconcile this with what you
stated about transcendent morality and
the heroic impulse that I guess men are
supposed to be born with ok ok ok so
while the skates the skateboarding
question is I wrote I have a book coming
out in 2018 called 12 rules for life and
antidote to chaos and one of the
chapters in there is from that Korra
posting and it's called don't bother
children when they're skateboarding and
it's sort of associated with what I'd
said earlier about parkour for example
is that you know kids need to go out and
push themselves against danger because
that's what life is is pushing yourself
against danger and and when you see kids
doing things that are dangerous but
spectacular then you kind of have a
moral obligation to back the hell off
and let them experiment with their own
mortality because you can't keep them
safe the best thing you can do is make
them able and courageous and I would say
that that's a more difficult lesson
generally speaking for mothers to learn
than for fathers to learn and that was
Freud's fundamental observation but it's
it's absolutely crucial and so I've seen
kids do I mean you know you can
obviously be a fool on the skateboard
although the distinction between being a
fool and developing yourself is not as
clear as people might like to imagine
and and when kids are out there with no
helmets and doing dangerous things it's
like there's a part of me that of course
is very worried about it but there's
another part of me that admires it very
much because they're practicing what
they need to practice in order to cope
with the world ok so there's that now
the other one was risky
and evil yeah well I got this partly
from Carl Rogers you know because Rogers
was either clinician very famous
clinician and and he he was he was a
Christian missionary to begin with but
he didn't end up that way but he was
very interested in the utility of
listening as a as a means of redemption
essentially and listening by the way is
if you have someone that you know that
has a problem the best thing you can
often do is listen to them if they're
actually trying to communicate because
people configure themselves through
speech and most people can't think and I
don't mean that in a mean way I mean the
way they think is by talking and they
can't talk unless they have someone to
talk to and it's partly because they're
bouncing the idea off them and seeing if
it makes sense and seeing how the person
responds so listening is a great thing
but Rogers was also interested in the in
the preconditions for having a
redemptive relationship and that could
be a therapeutic relationship or an
intimate relationship and one of the
things he claimed was that unless the
person was aiming upward there was
nothing you could do about it
that and that seemed to be associated
with this idea of that initial choice
say between good and evil and saying
when someone comes to therapy they've
already done something they've already
said I have a problem conceivably I
could fix it and I need to do something
about it and then so half the work is
already done by the time they show up
because they've already said well things
aren't as good as they could be and I
could do something about it the question
is can you do anything about someone who
isn't at that state and my observation
and this is Rogers observation as well
is that you can't I think you can serve
by example but until the person has
decided on their own that they're wrong
that's why they're suffering if there's
something wrong about what they're doing
and that they want to fix it I don't I
think that even trying to hammer against
that often makes it worse so and I know
that Solzhenitsyn when he was talking
about the communist ideologue the really
hardcore communist ideologue that were
eaten up by the Gulag Archipelago system
you know sort of devoured by their own
he saw the same thing was that until
they were willing to admit that
something was wrong with the manner in
which they had construed the world that
it had resulted in their own demise
that there was actually no way of
communicating with them they're in kind
of an authoritarian bubble and so so I I
don't think that so even if you orient
yourself as an archetypal hero there's
no way you can get through that barriers
well I think that that's part of the
issue of free will I think that I do not
think that people can learn unless they
admit that they're wrong
there was this there's this play the
cocktail hour by TS Eliot and he has
this woman in the play and she comes up
to a psychiatrist and she says just in
the course of casual conversation she
says I really hope there's something
wrong with me and of course the
psychiatrist is a bit taken aback by
that he says well why in the world would
you hope such a thing and she says
something like well like I'm suffering
then things are not good for me I'm
having a dreadful time of it as far as I
can tell there's only two possibilities
either the world in its essence is
conspiring against me and I'm doomed
because what am I going to do about the
world like it's just built into the
structure of reality or I'm doing
something wrong so I'm really hoping
that I'm doing something wrong because
if I am then maybe I could fix it and
I'd stop suffering and it's it's
something like that and see it's also I
think that if your life isn't what it
could be and you're suffering then it
seems to me that that should be
sufficient evidence that you don't know
enough and with if that isn't sufficient
evidence that you don't know enough then
I don't know how anyone else can provide
you without evidence and so I'm going to
leave it at that
this is psychological rescue not like
the rescuing someone who's drowning for
example you can rescue people when
they're drowning even if they don't want
perfect
I'll tell you something about that
though something interesting about that
and that's relevant but you know I don't
know how many of you know how you rescue
someone who's drowning you do it like
this right you come to them like this
and you push them away with your foot if
they're I'm telling you that's what you
do if you're a lifeguard because if
they're panicking and they grab you you
both drown and that's stupid because
then you both drown right and so and
that's a really good way that's a really
good metaphor for trying to help someone
- it's like when people are in real
trouble you know some of it's they're
confused and some of it is that their
life is collapsed around them and
there's some malevolence there and
there's some desire for vengeance like
one dangerous mess and if you're going
to wait in there unprepared the
probability that they're going to take
you down
compared to you elevating them is very
very high you know because you don't
even know what your damn psychological
stability rests on you might be saying
just because you're lucky and surrounded
by sane people that doesn't mean that
you have the psychological wherewithal
to really post someone up from the
depths of the underworld especially if
they've also got one foot in hell so you
should bloody well be careful about
doing that kind of thing it's it's
hubristic to attempt it and I would you
know I would definitely caution people
very carefully about trying to rescue
someone who doesn't want to be rescued
it's it's very dangerous activity and it
can easily be counterproductive
okay so vote since 2006 I've been trying
to figure out like extract the meta the
way you've put it of social justice
warriors and I think I found it actually
they seem to have this behavior where
they just they nebulize every standard
we have so they take a standard you have
that has full of criteria they say what
something is is how it is like that's a
podium but it has these criteria within
event oh sorry
they take them they do something called
nebulization where they take something
of what and they dissolve the criteria
such that there is no way to say how it
is so you see this now with gender where
someone will say their gender but
there's no way to get logically from how
they can be that gender like how you can
be an attack helicopter or a male or a
woman or something like that
but the thing that came from this and I
figured this out when I found about you
when I learned about you is that
nebulization appears to be the exact
opposite process of individuation
philosophic the silikal version of into
it individual that rests on three
premises or three core axioms which is I
exist which is an axiom that exists in
like an objective that you exist here
and then I am which is a reiteration or
reading reincarnation of I exist which
is basically you have to say I'm right
about having existed or else it just
falls apart and you have ass which is
the question begs from that well if you
exist and you're right as what and
you're talking about God being the the
metaphor of God in Genesis being the a
metaphor for the creation of
consciousness and it appears that
individuation actually fits that triad
because if you take adds for example and
the as is a it's a predictive aspect
when you try to take the subjective and
make it object it's you have an idea you
test it in reality and time is the
ultimate arbiter that determines these
things and it changes your understanding
the reality it gets it lets you know God
it lets you know the objective and then
from that point there's the subjective
which is supposed to be form from
objective reality because you've changed
that you know have to sacrifice your old
self the old way you saw Jordan Peterson
of ten years ago was not who he is now
so it gets sacrificed and at the same
time you can point back to that guy that
Jordan Peterson and say well that guy
was wrong and that's the scapegoating of
the Sun so the subjective aspect the I
am right is the son and the holy spirit
which is supposed to lead you to God is
the ass and I don't understand the
relationship between that in the first
part okay so can you just clarify that
the social justice aspect and the
nebulization oh the social justice is
the exact opposite process of
individuation that's all it is and it
actually occurs that adds if you're a
Tad's and you're thinking about what am
I you either apply individuation you try
to apply cry so you try to find out what
you are in reality or we refuse that
paradigm and say well look I am I'm
always going to be right I'm completely
self-righteous and you stomp at that
subjective aspect where everything
becomes subjective and you ultimately
become relativistic and nihilistic so
I'm asking have you considered that the
Genesis tale and the the creation myth
and God is actually the is the process
of individuation and the Trinity is
actually those three core premises the
three axioms that come
from that okay I haven't considered that
I mean I know that young draw drew a
parallel between the idea of the passion
for example and the development of human
individuality and so there's that that
idea is lurking inside the union notion
of individuation because it has to do
with the voluntary confrontation with
mortality and also with evil right as
two of the key elements of genuine self
realization I haven't considered the
metaphorical pathway that you just
described so I can't comment on that I'd
have to think about that but I could say
that one of the things that does disturb
me about the ideological battle that's
going on right now and I think this is a
very deep part of it and this is the
part that's a battle against the logos
in in derrida's old terms right the
fellow go centric West needs to be taken
down to its essence is the refusal to
engage in precise language and I see
that in part for example manifested in
the refusal of the people who are
criticizing to ever engage me in any
debate they don't believe in debate and
they don't believe in the in the in the
let's say the redemptive power of dialog
because mostly what they believe in his
power so there's a nebulization in that
manner there's this tendency to hide
behind what's vague and fog like instead
of making things sharp and clear and
crystalline and I do think that that's
well that's part of the degeneration of
a civilization as far as I'm concerned
so so you haven't considered that then
no it would you please I'll do my best
I'll do my best
Thanks thank you okay so one this is it
one more question and make it quick okay
hi dr. Peterson my question is I know
you stated in the last lecture that the
importance for setting aims in life and
to kind of have goals to work towards
right so my question was where do you
how do you do that if you don't know
where you want to go because that's kind
of where I got stuck on you're your
future off authoring program because
yeah okay that's that's a good question
that's a really good question I think
it's the echoed to some degree in the
structure of the biblical stories and in
this manner so there's this notion in
the Old Testament that morality is
following a sequence of prohibitions
there's a bunch of bad things you
shouldn't do and then basically you're
good enough and I think there's wisdom
in that I think that's kind of where
children start right you I mean I love
children and all that but they're
they're they're crazy little creatures
and they need to be you know civilized
and partly what you do is you you lay
prohibitions on them and mostly what
you're trying to do is lay prohibitions
on them for the behaviors that if they
manifested would make their life
miserable so I have another chapter in
this book that I'm writing called don't
let your children do anything that makes
you dislike them and the idea there is
that your your job as a parent is to
help your children become the sort of
four-year-olds that adults genuinely
smile at when they come into a room
because that makes the entire social
environment both truthful and welcoming
and so your job is to make them
desirable social beings and a lot of
that is prohibition okay and there's
this ethical transformation and it
happens to some degree in the in the
tradition of the in the prophetic
tradition where there's a spirit that
seemed in some sense to rise above the
law but there's a real transformation
between the Old Testament and the New
Testament because the Old Testament is
prohibition and the New Testament is
well here's the good things you do once
you're more than merely prohibiting
yourself from from impulsive sin let's
say there's a positive good to be
accomplished well you might say well I
don't know what the positive good is
fair enough man so so this is why this
thing that I've said to people to become
this crazy internet mean but that's to
clean up your room and which which is a
lot better more useful than people think
it's a lot harder too but does the thing
the first thing you do I think and I
learned this in part from Solzhenitsyn
when he was trying to iron out his soul
when he was in the gulag because he was
trying to figure out how he got there
how he contributed to how he got there
you know not Stellan and Hitler even
though they were kind of a blade you
know but he wasn't much he could do
about that I think what you have to do
and this is part of humility is you have
to look around you within your sphere of
influence like the direct sphere of
influence and fix the things that
announce themselves as in need of repair
and those are often small things you
know and they can be like your room put
it in order because the thing is it
isn't exactly so important that your
room is in order although it is what's
important is that you learn how to
distinguish between chaos and order and
to be able to act in a manner that
produces order and in most households
there's a hundred things that could be
done to just make it less hideous and
horrible and so practicing that is it's
a real useful form of meditation and
it's also it's also I think it's a
divine act because you're taking payoffs
and you know if you pay attention even
to a room it's so interesting I learned
because I've renovated many places now
and tried to make them beautiful and one
of the things that I really learned is
that even if you own a structure unless
you've investigated all the nooks and
crannies and cleaned them up and put
your own imprint on them and made them
yours they're not yours the mere fact of
physical ownership doesn't make them
yours you have to establish a dynamic
relationship with the objects before
they're actually yours and I think you
can you can do something as simple as
just sit on your bed and think okay
there's probably like five things I
could do today so that tomorrow morning
is slightly better than this
morning was at least or at least I'm not
falling behind and those who usually be
like having to eat a toad in the morning
right it's like it's not going to be
something you want to do there'll be
things you're trying to avoid there
snakes essentially but if you ask
yourself like you're asking someone
which i think is a form of prayer if you
ask yourself instead of telling yourself
you know what is it that I could do to
set things more right today that I would
actually do it's usually some small
thing because he's not that disciplined
you know then you can go do it and then
you you put the world together a little
more when you do that and that spreads
out but you also put your you also
construct yourself into something that's
better able to call order forth from
chaos and that makes you just
incrementally stronger and then the next
day you can maybe take on a slightly
larger task and like you get the benefit
of compound interest if you do that it's
a tremendously powerful technique and
they think if you do that at some point
instead of just having to fix things up
that are not good you'll start to get a
glimmer of the positive things that you
could do you know you did the positive
things that you could do that would
actually constitute a vision and now
that's what I would recommend thank you
all right good night
I'm really looking forward to this
lecture not like I wasn't looking
forward to the other ones but the
stories that I want to cover tonight one
of the things that just absolutely
staggers me about them especially the
story of Cain and Abel which I hope to
get to is like it's so short it's
unbelievable it's like ten eleven lines
there's nothing to it at all and I've
found that it's essentially
inexhaustible in its capacity to reveal
meaning and I don't exactly know what to
make of that I mean I do I think you
know because I said I was going to take
as rational an approach to this issue as
I possibly could I think it has
something to do with this intense
process of condensation across very long
periods of time that's the simplest
explanation but I'll tell you the
information in there is so densely
packed that it really is it's really
it's not that easy to come up with an
explanation for that not one that's that
I find fully compelling I mean I do
think that the really old stories and
we've been covering the really archaic
stories in the Bible so far I think that
one of the things that you can be
virtually certain about is that
everything about them that was memorable
was remembered right and so in some
sense and this is kind of like the idea
of Richard Dawkins ideas of memes which
is often why I thought that Richard
Dawkins feels a little bit more
mystically inclined he would have become
Karl you because there are theories are
unbelievably similar the similar of meme
and the similar of Arc the idea of
archetypes of the collective unconscious
are very very similar ideas except Union
ideas far more profound in my estimation
well it just is he thought it through so
much better you know because Dawkins
tended to think of Mimas sort of like a
mind worm you know something that would
infest a mind and maybe multiple minds
but he never really took I don't think
he really ever took the idea with the
seriousness it deserved and I did hear
him actually make a joke with Sam Harris
the last time they talked about the fact
that that there was some possibility
that the production of memes say
religious memes could alter evolutionary
history and they both avoided that topic
instantly they had a big laugh about it
men decided they weren't going to go
down that road and so that wasn't fair
that was quite interesting to me but
these
is the the the density of these stories
I do really think still is a is a
mystery
it certainly has something to do with
their absolute their in their
impossibility to be forgotten you know
and that's actually something that we
could be tested empirically I don't know
if anybody has ever done that because
you could tell naive people two stories
even equal length right one that had an
archetypal theme and the other that
didn't and then wait three months and
see which one's people remembered better
and be relatively straightforward thing
to test I haven't tested it but maybe I
will at some point but anyways that's
all to say that I'm very excited about
this lecture because I get an
opportunity to go over the story of Adam
and Eve and the story of Cain and Abel
and I hopefully manage both of those
today and maybe we'll get to the story
of Noah and the Tower of Babel as well
but I wouldn't count on it not Arthur
eight we've been not at the rate we've
been progressing if that's okay that's
that's no problem it's there's no sense
rushing this alright so we're going to
go before we go that before we do that I
want to finish my discussion of the idea
of the psychological significance of the
idea of God and I've been thinking about
this a lot more you know because of
course this lecture series gives me the
opportunity and the necessity to
continue to think and you know it
certainly is the case so the hypothesis
that I've been developing with the
Trinitarian idea is something like that
the Trinitarian idea is the earliest
emergence in image of the idea that
there has to be an underlying cognitive
structure that gives rise to
consciousness as well as consciousness
itself and so what I would suggest was
that the idea of God the Father is
something akin to the idea of the a
priori
structure that that gives rise to
consciousness you know that's an inbuilt
part of us so that's our structure you
could think about that as something
that's been produced over a vast
evolutionary time span and I don't think
that's completely out of keeping with
the with the with the ideas that are
laid forth in Genesis one at least if
you think about them from a metaphorical
perspective and it's hard to read them
literally because I don't know what you
know there's an emphasis on day and
night but the idea of day and night as
as 24-hour diurnal you know daytime and
nighttime interchanges that are based on
the claw
on the earthly clock seems to be a bit
absurd when you first start to think
about the construction of the cosmos so
just doesn't seem to me that a literal
interpretation is appropriate and I mean
it's another thing that you might not
know but you know many of the early
church fathers one of them Origen in
particular stated very clearly this was
in 300 AD that these ancient stories
were to be taken as as wise metaphors
and not to be taken literally like the
idea that the people who established
Christianity for example were all the
sorts of people who were biblical
literalist it's just absolutely
historically wrong I mean some of them
were and some of them still are that's
not the point many of them weren't and
it's not like people who live 2,000
years ago were stupid by any stretch of
the imagination and so they were
perfectly capable of understanding what
constant you know what constituted
something approximating a metaphor and
also knew that fiction in some sense
considered as an abstraction could tell
you truth that nonfiction wasn't able
wasn't able to get at lets you think
that fiction is only for entertainment
and I think that's a very that's a
that's a big mistake to think that so
alright so here we go so yes so with
regards to the idea of God the Father so
the idea is that in order to make sense
out of the world you have to have an a
priori cognitive structure that was
something that Immanuel Kant as I said
last time put forward as an argument
against the idea that all of the
information that we acquire during our
lifetime is a consequence of incoming
sense data and the reason that Kant
objected to that and he was absolutely
right about this is that you can't make
sense of sense data without an a priori
structure you can't extract from sense
data the structure that enables you to
make sense of sense data it's not
possible and that's really being
demonstrated I would say beyond the
shadow of a doubt since the 1960s and
the best demonstration of that was
actually the initial failure of
artificial intelligence because when the
AI people started promising that we
would have fully functional and
autonomous robots and artificial
intelligence back in the 1960s what they
didn't understand and what stole them
terribly until about the early 1990s was
that it was almost that the problem of
perception with a much deeper problem
than anybody ever recognized because
like when you look at the world you just
see well look there's objects out there
and by the way you don't
objects you see tools just so you know
in the neurobiology that's quite clear
you don't see objects and infer utility
you see useful things and infer object
so it's actually the reverse of what
people generally think but the point is
is that regardless of whether you see
objects or useful things when you look
at the world you just see it and you
think well seeing is easy because
they're the things are and all you have
to do is like you know turn your head
and they appear and that's just so wrong
that it's it's almost impossible to
overstate like the problem of perception
is staggeringly difficult and one of the
primary reasons that we still don't
really have autonomous robots so there
were a lot closer to it than we were in
the 1960s because it turned out that you
actually have to have an embodied you
have to have a body before you can say
it and even more importantly you have to
have a body before you can see because
the act of seeing is actually the act of
mapping the patterns of the world onto
the patterns of the body it's not things
are out there you see them then you
think about them then you evaluate them
then you decide to act on them and then
you act I mean that you could call that
a folk idea of psychological processing
or a perception it's not that is not how
it works like your eyes for example map
one of the things they do is map right
onto your spinal cord for example they
might right onto your emotional system
so it's actually possible for example
for people to be blind and still be able
to detect facial expressions which is to
say you can with someone who's
cortically blind so they've had their
visual cortex destroyed often by a
stroke they'll tell you that they can't
see anything but they can guess which
hand you put up if you ask them to and
if you flash them pictures of angry or
fearful faces they show skin conductance
responses to the more emotion laden
faces and it's because imagine that the
world is made out of patterns which it
is then imagine that those patterns are
transmitted to you electromagnetically
you have to light and then imagine that
the pattern is duplicated on the retina
and then that pattern is propagated
along the optic nerve and then the
pattern is distributed throughout your
brain and some of that pattern makes up
what you call conscious vision but other
parts of it just activate your body so
for example when I look at this when I
look at this this whatever it whatever
it is a bottle that's words
huh you know when I look at it
especially with intent in mind as soon
as I look at it the pattern of the BOD
of the bottle activates the gripping
mechanism of my hand and part of the
action of per sortie the active
perception is to adjust my bodily
posture including my hand grip to be of
the optimal size to pick that up and
it's not that I see the bottle and then
think about how to move my hand that's
too slow it's that I use my motor motor
cortex to perceive the bottle and that's
actually somewhat independent of
actually seeing the bottle as a
conscious experience so anyways huh the
reason the reason that I'm telling you
that all of that and there's much more
about that that can be told rodney
brooks 'is someone to know about he's a
robotics engineer who worked in the
1990s and he invented the Roomba among
many other things so he's a real genius
stuffed guy and he works was one of the
first people to really point out that to
have to be able to have a machine that
perceived well enough to work in the
world that you had to give it a body and
that the perception would actually be
built from the body up rather than from
the abstract cognitive perceptions down
and so well and that that turned out to
be the case and bird rooks boiled all
sorts of weird little machines in the
1990s that didn't even really have any
central brain but they could do things
like run away from light and so they
could perceive light that their
perception was that act of running away
from right and so perception perception
is very very very tightly tied to action
in ways that people don't normally
perceive anyways that's all to say that
you cannot perceive the world without
being embody and you know your embodied
in a manner that's taken you roughly
three and a half billion years to pull
off right there's being a lot of death
as a prerequisite to the embodied form
that you take and so it's taken all that
trial and error to produce something
like you that can interact with the
complexity of the world well enough to
last the relatively paltry 80 or so
years that you can last and so I think
about that as this may be wrong but I
think it's a useful at least it's a
useful hypothesis I think the idea
God the Father is something like the
birth of the idea that there has to be
an internal structure that out of which
consciousness itself arises that gives
form to things and well and if that's
the case and perhaps it's not but if
it's the case it's certainly reflection
it's a reflection of the kind of factual
truth that I've been describing now and
then like I also mentioned that I kind
of see the idea of both the Holy Spirit
and those also of Christ and most
specifically of Christ in in the form of
the word as the active consciousness
that that structure produces and uses
not only to to formulate the world
because we formulate the world at least
the world that we experience we
formulate but also to change and modify
that world because there's absolutely no
doubt that we do that partly with our
bodies which are optimally developed to
do that which is why we have hands
unlike dolphins would have you know very
large brains like us but can't really
change the world we're really adapted
and evolved to change the world and to
world and our speech is really a an
extension of our ability to use our
hands so the speech systems that we use
are you know very well-developed
motor very well-developed motor skill
and generally speaking your your
dominant linguistic hemisphere is the
same as your dominant hand and people
talk with their hands like me as you may
have noticed and we use sign language
and there's a tight relationship between
the use of the hand and the use of
language and that's partly because
language is a productive force and the
hand is part of it part of what changes
the world and so all those things are
tied together in a very very complex way
with this a priori structure and also
with the embodied structure and I also
think that's part of the reason why
classical Christianity puts such an
emphasis not only on the divinity of the
Spirit but also on the divinity of the
body this is a harder thing to grapple
with you know it's easier for people to
think if you think in religious terms at
all that you have some sort of
transcended spirit that somehow detached
from the body that might have some life
after death something like that but the
Christian Christianity in particular
really insists on the divinity of the
body so the idea is that there's an
underlying structure it's
this quasi patriarchal nature partly
because it's for complex reasons but
partly because it's a reflection of the
social structure as well as other things
and then that uses consciousness in the
form particularly of language but most
particularly in the form of truthful
language in order to produce the world
in a manner that's good and I think
that's a walloping powerful powerful
idea especially the relationship between
the idea that it's truthful speech that
gives rise to the good because that's a
really fundamental moral claim and I
think that's a tough one to beat man
because one of the things I've really
noticed is and then this and it isn't
just me that's for sure
is that you know there's a lot of
tragedy in life there's no doubt about
that
and lots of people that I see for
example in my clinical practice are laid
low by the tragedy of life but I also
see very very frequently that people get
tangled up in deceit in webs of deceit
that are often multiple generations long
and that just takes them out you know
and so that so deceit can produce
extraordinary levels of suffering that
lasts for very very long periods of time
and that's really a clinical truism you
know because Freud of course identified
one of the problems that contributed to
the suffering we might associate with
mental illness with repression which is
it's kind of like a lie of omission
that's a perfectly reasonable way to
think about it and you stated straight
out that there was no difference between
the psychotherapeutic the curative
psychotherapeutic effort and supreme
moral effort including truth that those
were the same thing as far as he was
concerned and Carl Rogers another great
clinician who was at one point a
Christian missionary before he became
more Moore's more strictly scientific he
believed that it was in truthful
dialogue that that that clinical
transformation took place and you know
it and of course one of the
prerequisites for genuine transformation
in the clinical setting is that the
therapist tells the truth and the client
tells the truth because otherwise how in
the world do you know what's going on
how can you solve the problem when you
don't even know what the problem is and
you don't know what the problem is
unless the person tells you the truth
that's something really to think about
in light of your own relationships
because you know if you don't tell the
people around you
the truth and they don't know who you
are and maybe that's a good thing you
know because well seriously people have
reasons to lie right I mean that aren't
trivial but it's really worth knowing
that you can't even get your hands on
the problem unless you formulate it
truthfully and if you can't get your
hands on the problem the probability
that you're going to solve it is it's
just so low and so then I've been
thinking about as well the this and this
idea has become more credible to me the
longer I've developed it the longer I
thought about it you know the idea that
there's oh go Bob it's partly the idea
that well let me let me figure out how
to start this property friend of mine
business partner and a guy that I've
written scientific papers with very
smart guy took me to task and I think I
told you this a little bit about using
the term dominance hierarchy which might
be fine for like chimpanzees and for
lobsters and for creatures like that but
not not first not not for chimpanzees
even so much and and he said something
very interesting he thought that the
idea of dominance hierarchy was actually
a projection of a early 20th century
quasi Marxist hypothesis onto the animal
kingdom that was being observed and the
notion that the hierarchical structure
that you see that characterizes say
mating hierarchies in chimps for example
the idea that that was predicated on
power was actually a projection of a
kind of political ideology and I thought
that really bugged me for a long time
when he said that because like because
I'd really been used to using the term
dominant IURC and I thought he told me
all that I thought that's so annoying
it's so annoying because it might be
right and then it took me months to
think about it and then I and then I was
also reading funds to all at the same
time and he's a primatologist and also
Jaak panksepp because he was a brilliant
brilliant effective neuroscientist who
unfortunately just died he wrote a great
book called aspect of neuroscience and
for rats to play they have to play fair
or they won't play with each other and
that's that's a staggering discovery
right because anything that helps
instantiate the emergence of ethical
behavior in animals and that associates
it with an evolutionary process which is
essentially what what pays up was doing
gives credence to the notion that the
ethics that guide us are not near social
logical epiphenomena constructs their
deep deeply rooted if flat and that
they're rats for God's sake he can't
trust them and they still play fair you
know and the will notice that the chimp
troops that he studied but it wasn't
wasn't the barber barbaric chimp that
ruled with an iron fist that was the
successful ruler because he kept getting
torn to shreds by his by the compatriots
that he ignored and stomped on Susie
showed some weakness they just tear him
into pieces
the chimp leaders that were stable you
know that had a stable Kingdom let's say
we're very reciprocal in terms of their
interactions with their friends and
chimps have friends and they out they
actually last for very long time chimp
friendships and they were also very
reciprocal in their interactions with
the females and with the infants and I
thought that's what friends the wall is
a very smart guy and I thought that was
also foundational science because it's
really something to note that the
attributes that give rise to dominance
in a male dominance hierarchy sort of
use that word let's call it authority
that might be better or even shudder
competence which I think is a better way
of thinking about it is that that's not
predicated purely on anything that's
that's that's as simple as brute power
and I think too you know I think as well
that the idea and this is a deeply
devious and dangerous political idea in
my estimation the idea that male
dominance hierarchies sorry male
hierarchies are fundamentally predicated
on power in a little in a law-abiding in
a law-abiding society I think is I think
all you fu think about that for like a
month say she's not long to understand
how absurd that is because most people
who are in positions of authority let's
say are just as hemmed in by ethical
responsibilities or even more so than
people at the other levels of the of the
hierarchy and we know this even in the
managerial literature because we know
generally speaking that managers are
more stressed by their subordinates than
the subordinates are stressed by their
managers and that's not surprising you
want to be responsible for like 200
people you really want that that's hard
work man and I mean I know it's a pain
to have a boss because the
to care about what the boss thinks and
maybe the person is arbitrary which case
they're not going to be particularly
successful but it's no joke to be
responsible for 200 people and you have
to behave very carefully when you're in
a position of responsibility and
authority like that because you will get
called out if you make mistakes
constantly so it's not like you're it's
not like because you have a position
that's higher up in the hierarchy that
you're less constrained by ethical
necessity now if you're a psychopath
well that's a whole different story but
Psychopaths have to move pretty rapidly
from hierarchy to hierarchy right
because they get found out quite quickly
and as soon as their reputation is
shattered then they can't get away with
their shenanigans anymore so okay so all
of this is to say that there is
something very interesting about the
pattern of behavior so imagine that
imagine that sexual selection is working
something like this and we know that
sexual selection is a very very very
very powerful biological force even
though biologists ignored it for almost
a hundred years after Charles Darwin
originally wrote about it thinking
mostly about natural selection they
didn't like the idea of sexual selection
because it tended to introduce the
notion of mind into the process of
evolution because it deals with choice
you know but so imagine on the one hand
that you have a male hierarchy we know
that the men at the top of the hierarchy
are much more likely to be reprimanded
the boil it's particularly true of men
so you have twice as many female
ancestors as you have male ancestors not
going to do the math but and I know it
doesn't sound plausible but you could
look it up and figure it out it's it's
perfectly reasonable fact that actually
happens to be true
so there's twice as if twice as many
female ancestors because females are
twice as likely on average to leave
offspring as men now what happens is any
man man who does reproduce tends to
reproduce more than once but a bunch of
the reproduce zero whereas so it would
be the average man who reproduces has
two children and the average man who
doesn't reproduce have zero obviously
and the average woman who reproduces has
one child so that means that there's
twice as many females in your line as
there is males so that that's a big deal
and and so imagine that it works
something like this so the men elect
the competent men who are admired and
who are and who are I can't say dominant
who are who are given positions of
authority and respect let's put it that
way and it's like an election now it
could be an actual democratic election
but it's at least an election of
consensus or it's at least an election
of well we're not going to kill him for
now which is also a form of election
right it's a form of Tolerance you know
so so and then what happens is the women
for their part peel from the top of the
mental hierarchy and so you've got two
factors that are driving human sexual
selection across vast stretches of
evolutionary time one is the election of
men by men to positions where they're
much more likely to reproduce and the
second is the tendency of women to peel
off the top of dáil dominant turkeys
which is extraordinarily well
established cross culturally even if you
flatten out the socio-economic disparity
say between men and women like they've
done in Scandinavia you don't you don't
reduce the tendency of women to peel off
the top of the male hierarchy by much
and why would you I mean women are smart
why in the world wouldn't they go for
four
why wouldn't they strive to make
relationships with men who are
relatively successful and why wouldn't
they let the men themselves define why
that how that constitutes success it
makes sense like if you want to figure
out who the best man is why not let the
men compete and the man who wins
whatever the competition is is the best
man by definition how else would you
define it so okay so why am I telling
you all that well the reason is is
because it seems to me that there's this
comp this being this complex interplay
across human evolution between the
election of the male dominance hierarchy
and sexual success and that's a big deal
if it's true it could be because what
would happen you see is that as men
evolved they would evolve to be better
and better at climbing up the male
hierarchy because the ones who weren't
good at that wouldn't reproduce so
obviously that's going to happen but
then it wouldn't just be a hierarchy
because there's a whole bunch of
different hierarchies and so then you
might say well are there commonalities
across hierarchies
reasonable thing to propose it mean
they're not completely opposed to one
another at least if you're more success
relatively more successful in run
hierarchy then you're more probable it's
more probable that you'll be successful
in another and that's actually a really
good definition of general intelligence
or IQ and that's actually one of the
things that women select men for now men
also select women for that but the
selection pressure is even higher from
women to men and general IQ is one of
the things that propels you up across
dominant turkeys because it's a general
problem-solving mechanism and the other
thing that seems to do that to some
degree is conscientiousness and there's
also some evidence that women prefer
conscientious men so and of course why
wouldn't they because you can trust them
and and and and and they work and so
those are both good things so then you
think okay so men have adapted to start
to climb the male dominance hierarchy
but it's the set of all possible
hierarchies that they're adapted to
climb and so then you think there's
there's a set of attributes that can be
acted out that and that can be embodied
that will increase the probability that
you're going to rise to the top of any
given hierarchy and then you could say
well that as you adapt to that fact then
you start to develop an understanding of
what that pattern constitutes and so
that starts to become the abstract
representation of something like
multi-dimensional competence and that's
like the abstraction of virtue itself
well and none of that has them none of
that's arbitrary now and that's as
bloody well grounded in biology if
anything could be and I think that's a
really hard argument to refute and like
one of the things I should tell you
about how I think is that when I think
something I spend a long time trying to
figure out if it's wrong you know
because I like to hack at it from every
possible direction to see if it's a weak
idea because if it's a weak idea then
I'd rather just dispense with it and
find something better and I've had a
real hard time trying to figure out
what's wrong with that idea I it seems
to me that it's pretty damn solid and
then the idea that you know if you watch
what people do in movies and so on and
when they're reading fiction it's
obvious that they're very good at
identifying both the hero and the
antihero we could say the antihero
generally speaking the bad guy is
someone who strives for authority and
position but fails
generally speaking not always but fail
so he's a good bad example a kid you
take a kid to a good guy bad guy movie
the kid takes out pretty fast that he's
not supposed to be the bad guy and and
figures out very quickly to zero in on
the good guy and that means that there's
there's an affinity between the pattern
of good guy that's being played out in
the fiction and the perceptual capacity
of the child you know and one of the
things I told my son when he was a kid I
used to take him to movies that were
sometimes more frightening than they
should have been but one of the things I
always told him was I never said don't
be afraid because I think that's bad
advice for kids what I said was keep
your eye on the hero right keep your eye
on the hero and again he was gripped by
the movie and often quite afraid of them
you know because movies can be very
frightening so he just like zero in on
that guy and hoping and you know what
it's like in a movie you hope that the
good guy wins generally speaking and I
mean why do you do that where does that
where does that come from you see how
deeply rooted that is inside you you'll
bloody well go line up and pay to watch
that happen it's not an easy thing to
understand and it's it's so self-evident
to people that we don't even notice that
it's a tremendous mystery and so is it
so unreasonable to think that we would
have actually over the millennia come to
some sort of collective conclusion about
what the best of the best guys are best
of the good guys are and what the worst
of the bad guys are and to me
architect Lee speaking thinking of that
as the hostile brothers so that's Christ
and Satan or Cain and Abel for example
very common mythological motif the
hostile brothers it's like those are
those those are archetypes it's like the
Satan for example is by definition the
worst that a person can be and Christ by
definition this is independent of
anything but conceptualization is by
definition the best today that a man can
be now as I said speaking
psychologically and conceptually but I
given our capacity for imagination and
our ability to engage in fiction and our
love for fiction and our capacity to
dramatize and our love for the story
stories of heroism and catastrophe and
and good and evil I can't see how it
could
any other way like so well so so that's
part of the idea that's driving the
notion of the evolution of the idea of
God and even more specifically driving
the evolution of the idea at least in
part of the Trinity so God is an
abstracted ideal formulated in large
part to dissociate the ideal from any
particular incarnation or man or any
ruler and there's another rule in the
biblical stories which is that when the
actual ruler I've mentioned this before
when the actual ruler becomes confused
with the abstracted ideals then the
state immediately turns into a tyranny
and the whole bloody thing collapses so
the idea it's so sophisticated you know
one of the things that we figured out
and this was a hard thing to figure out
was that you had to take the abstraction
and divorce it from any particular power
structure and then think about it as
something that existed as an abstraction
but a real thing right real and that it
governed your behavior in everyone's
behavior including the damned king the
king was responsible to the abstracted
ideal man that's an impossible that is
such an impossible ideal you know why
would if they agreed that 5000 years ago
but one of the things you see
continually happening in the Old
Testament is that as soon as the
Israelite for example the Israelite
Kings become almighty the real God comes
along and just cuts them into pieces and
then the whole bloody state falls apart
for like hundreds of years it's like I
think that's a lesson that that we have
not thoroughly consciously yet learned
it's still implicit in the narratives we
still haven't figured out why that's the
case
again I think that's a real hard
argument to to to dispense with so all
right so we looked at this a little bit
the Trinitarian idea is that there's a
there's a father that's maybe the
dramatic representation of the
structures that underlie consciousness
the embody structures that underlie
consciousness and then there's the son
and that's that that's consciousness but
in its particular historical form that's
the thing that's so interesting about
the figure of the son and then there's
consciousness as such and that seems to
be something like the
the indwelling spirit and so I mean
these psychological ideas came from
somewhere right that they have a history
they didn't just spring out of nowhere
and they emerge from from dreams and
hypothesis and artistic visions and all
of that over a long time and maybe they
get clarified into something like
consciousness but it takes a long time
to get from to get from watching you
know from to chimpanzees watching each
other to a human being saying well we're
we all we all exhibit this faculty
called consciousness I mean that's a
long journey you know that's a really
long journey and there's going to be
plenty of stages in between one of the
things I really like about Jean Piaget
the developmental psychologist was that
he was so insistent that children act
out and dramatized ideas before they
understand them and and Merlin Donald
who's a psychologist at Queen's
University wrote a couple of interesting
books along those lines at all as well
looking at the importance of imitation
for the development of higher cognition
in human beings and so the notion that
we embody ideas before we abstract them
out and then represent them in an
articulated way I think is an
extraordinarily solid idea and I really
can't see how it could be any other way
and if you watch children you see that
like think about what a child is doing
when he plays house or she plays house
you know the child acts out the father
or the mother but what's so interesting
about me to think well look isn't that
cute she's imitating her mother it's
like no she's not that's not what
happens because when your child imitates
you it's very annoying because you move
your arm and then they move their arm
and you know that you move your head to
copy you no one likes that it's direct
direct imitation that's not what a child
is doing with the child is playing what
the child is doing is watching the
mother over multiple instantiations and
then extracting out the spirit called
mother and that's whatever if mother
like across all those multiple
manifestations and then laying out that
pattern internally and manifesting
itself in an abstract world it's so
sophisticated it's just I'm that's what
you're doing when you're playing house
or having a tea partier or taking care
of a doll it's not
you've seen your mother take care of a
doll you haven't seen that it's that
you're smart enough to pull out the
abstraction and then embody it and
certainly the child is attempting to
strive towards an ideal at that point
you know she's not lighting her doll on
fire you know well with you know certain
exceptions but generally ones that we
try to not encourage right so so you see
that capacity in the children and it's
something we also know that if children
don't don't engage in that sort of
dramatic and pretend play to a
tremendous degree that they don't they
don't get properly socialized it's
really a critical element of developing
self understanding and then also
developing the capability of being with
others because what you do when you're a
child especially around the age of four
is you jointly construct a shared
fictional world will play house together
let's say and then you act out your
joint roles within that shared fictional
world you know and and that's a form of
very advanced cognitions very
sophisticated I see that and Piaget did
as well and so did you and so did Freud
these brilliant observers and also
Merlin Donald these brilliant observers
of the manner in which cognition came to
be they noted very clearly that embodied
imitation and dramatic abstraction
constituted the ground out of which
higher abstract cognition emerged enough
how could it not be because obviously we
were mostly bodies before we were minds
clearly and so we were acting out things
way before we understood them just like
the chimpanzees act out the idea that
you know you have to act reasonably
sensibly if your head chimpanzee or
you're going to get yourself ripped
apart and you see that rules because
when wolves have a dominance dispute you
know they pump up their hair at each
other to look big and they they growl
and bark and you know they're very
menacing and one wolf chickens out rolls
over puts up his neck and basically what
he's saying is yeah I'm pretty useless
so you could kill me if I want to if you
want to and the other wolf says yeah you
know you're pretty useless and I could
tear out your throat but tomorrow we
might need to bring down a wolf
or moves so I'll kick you out and and
it's not like they think that because
they don't know they don't think that
they acted out as a behavioral pattern
then if you're an anthropologist or a an
ethologist and you went and watched the
wolves you'd say it's as if they were
acting according to the following rule
and that often confused me because I
thought well the wolves act black wolves
act out rules and I thought no no a rule
is what we construct when we articulate
a behavioral pattern right we observe a
stable behavioral pattern and when we
articulate it we can call it a rule but
for the Wolves it's not a rule it's just
a stable behavioral pattern and so we
acted like wolf troops or chimpanzee
troops all of that when well i'm firfer
untold really untold tens and perhaps
hundreds of millions of years before we
were able to formulate that pattern of
behavior at anything approximating a
story or the image and and even longer
before we could articulate it as a set
of ethical rules and I'm dwelling this I
know I've repeated some of this before
but it's so important because you know
there's this tremendous push especially
from the social the social
constructionist to make the case that
ethics is arbitrary ethics is morality
is relative there's no fundamental
biological grounding in relationship to
human behavior especially in the in the
category of ethics and I think that
that's well first of all it's dangerous
because that means that people are
anything you want to turn them into and
you bloody well better be careful of
people who think that and second I just
think that the evidence that that's
wrong is so overwhelming that we should
just stop thinking that way I mean the
and that's probably why I'm also
attacking this from an evolutionary
perspective there's lots of converging
lines of evidence that ethic ethical
standards of at least of the most of the
most crucial store sort not only evolve
but also spontaneously re-emerge for
example in the dramatic play of children
so we need to take that seriously and so
well that's partly what we're doing here
trying to take that seriously so
okay so the idea there at least in part
was that the father employed the Sun to
generate habitable order out of chaos I
also think there might be something more
approximately true about that as well
too because one of the things we do know
there's something that's cool about men
men are much more criminal than women
and that by the way that does not look
like it's socio-cultural partly because
it Peaks when testosterone kicks in
around 14
like it just spikes the hell up and then
it really it stays pretty high until
about 27 and so standard penological
theory for those of you who don't know
this is that if you have a repeat
offender you know a guy who just won't
stop getting in trouble yes home in
prison till he's 28 and it isn't like
you're rehabilitating him or anything
it's like by 28 he's done with his
criminal career because the crime curve
is peaks at 15 and then falls down
around 27 or so it burns out and that's
often by the way that's often that's
that's often when men get married and
settle down and stabilized
one of the things that's one of the
things that's cool about that is the
creativity curve for men is almost
exactly the same thing it ramps up when
testosterone kicks in and then it starts
to flatten out around 27 that curves
match very very closely so that's so
that's that's quite cool
it's the creativity element of it that
I'm particularly interested in because
the creativity is in many ways it
attributed youth and that's look I mean
if you look at that sentence and you've
stripped it of its religious context
what you would say is that well the
older people use the younger people to
generate creative ideas and renew the
world it's like yeah that's that's what
happens and you you know you also have
no idea how many of the things that we
discovered or invented as human beings
were stumbled across by children and
adolescence you know because they're
well they're much more exploratory
they're less constrained by their by
their already extent knowledge
structures and they're less conservative
so yeah that seems just right to me so
and right in an extraordinarily
important way because it also means that
it's like if you're an actual father one
of the things that it means is that
that's part of what you should be
encouraging your son to do right which
is which is does the rail of a father is
to encourage that is clearly the role
and to encourage is to say well go out
there confront the chaos of the unknown
and the chaos that underlies everything
and drop it with it you know how because
you can do it here as big as the chaos
itself and you know do something useful
as a consequence and makes your life
better and make everyone else's life
better and you know you can do it and
man that's the right thing to tell
that's the right thing to tell young men
you know talking to young women is more
complicated because they have more more
let's say issues to deal with because
their lives are more complicated in some
ways but that's definitely the right
thing to be to be telling your your son
and one of the things that I've really
noticed recently since I've been
lecturing especially in the last seven
or eight months most of my audiences
being young men and and I've talked a
lot of them too a lot I've talked a lot
to them about both truth and
responsibility and I think that those
those are the two things that underlie
this capacity and it there seems to me
to be a tremendous hunger for that idea
it's not the same idea as right you know
it's very different ideas it's a
counterpart to right and so it's you
know life is hard it's chaotic it's
difficult it's really definitely a
challenge and so you can either shrink
from that and no bloody wonder because
you know it's going to kill you it's not
it's no joke man where you can fuckin
front it and try to do something about
it well what's better and and then you
say to the person look man you could do
it like that's what a human being is
like and if you just stood up and got
yourself together and you find out by
trying that you can in fact do that and
I do think that that's that's a great
core religious message as far as I can
tell and I think that's deeply embedded
in this sort of in this sort of idea so
all right so this is what I've been
telling you this is something like how
knowledge itself is generated first of
all there's the unknown as
and that's really what you don't know
anything about and generally when you
encounter that you don't encounter it
with thought you encounter it like this
right and that that's the first
representation of the absolutely unknown
it's something that is beyond your
comprehension and it's terrifying and
because it's beyond your comprehension
you cannot perceive it you cannot
understand it but you still have to deal
with it and the way you deal with it is
that you freeze that's what the that's
what a basilisk does say to the to the
kids in Harry Potter right they take a
look at it and they freeze that's the
snake the terrible snake of chaos that
lives underneath everything you see that
that thing freezes you and that's
because you're a prey animal but at the
same time it makes you curious and so
that's the first level of contact with
the absolute unknown is the emotional
combination of freezing and curiosity
and that's reflected I think in the
Dragon stories the dragon is the
terrible thing that lives underground
Accords gold or hoards virgins very very
strange behavior for reptile as we
pointed out before but the idea is that
it's a symbolic representation of the
predatory quality of the unknown
combined with the capacity of the
unknown to generate nothing but novel
information and it's very you can see
that is very characteristic of human
beings because we are prey animals but
we're also unbelievably exploratory and
we're pretty damn good predators and we
occupy this weird cognitive niche and so
one of the things we've learned is that
if we forth lightly confront the unknown
terrifying as it is there's a massive
prize to be gained continually and so
that seems to be true right it's true as
anything is and then I would also say
that that idea and we know that one of
the metaphors that underlies gods
extraction of habitable order out of
chaos at the beginning of time is an
older idea and a more archaic idea that
God confronted something like the
Leviathan and that's one of the words
for this serpent like chaos creature
that's often used in the Old Testament
or the Leviathan and they beat them on
yeah that's the other thing and so
there's this idea that I think came
probably came from the Mesopotamia
that the God either in the sun-like
aspect or in the father like aspect is
the thing that confronts this terrible
beast that represents the chaotic
unknown and cuts it into pieces and then
sometimes gives the body parts to the
populace in order to feed them so you
can see a hunting metaphor there as well
but it's deeper than that
and so all right so the first thing is
there's the absolute unknown and the
unknown is what you do not understand
it's what's beyond the campfire maybe
it's what's beyond the tree even more
anciently an old word when we when we
lived in trees it's out there that where
you don't know and what's out there
crocodiles and snakes and birds of prey
and cats and all sorts of things like
predatory cats and they will eat you but
there's utility and going out there to
find out what's there like maybe you go
and you don't kill the snake you kill
the damn nest of snakes and that makes
you pretty popular just as you should be
that accelerates your your rep reductive
potential let's say and we're descended
from people who did that and so we have
this notion about how the world is
structured that's deeply embedded in our
psyche like really really deeply way way
down way below the surface cognition way
down in the limbic system in these
ancient parts of the brain that are like
60 million years old or a hundred
million years old or older than that
ancient ancient brain structures and so
the first thing we do is we act out our
encounter with the unknown world and we
act that out in the same way in a manner
that's analogous to the manner that's
presented as a description of what it is
that God does at the beginning of time
to extract habitable order out of chaos
and I I will tell you about the other
part of that for now so you act it out
first and then the second thing is you
watch people who act it out and you
start to make representations of that
that's stories right and maybe you
admire them and then after a long time
you collect a bunch of those stories and
then you can say what that is you can
articulate it as a pattern and so and
this is something Nietzsche also figured
out to begin with you know because prior
to Nietzsche I would say he did so many
things first it was quite remarkable you
know there was an idea that you first
think and then you act and then people
like to think that of course you do it
bloody rubbish because you're impulsive
as you can possibly imagine you're
always doing things before you think and
sometimes that's a really good idea so
the idea that you see things and then
think and then act it's like you really
know I'm sorry did I don't do that I
know one I know I know does that and
they certainly do that don't do that
when they're emotional you know you act
first and one of the things that
Nietzsche said very clearly was that our
ideas emerged out of the ground of our
action over over thousands and thousands
of years and then when philosophers were
putting forward those ideas what they
were doing wasn't generating creative
ideas they were just telling the story
of humanity it's already there it's
already in us it's already in our
patterns of behavior and and it strikes
me that that's well he was a genius and
that was one of the genius one of his
many many observations of pure genius
and so you can think about it you know
you can think about it like this too is
that there's unknown and then you act in
the face of the unknown and then you you
dream about the action and that's what
you're doing in a movie theater and then
you speak about it and so you know and
of course once you speak about it that
affects how you dream and how you dream
affects how you act it's not like the
all of the causal direction is it was
one way because it's not deep these
things loop but it's still from the
unknown through the body through the
imagination into articulation that's the
primary mode of the generation of of
wisdom let's say and you can easily map
that onto an evolutionary explanation
because the body comes first right and
then is the imagination which is the
body in abstraction and only then the
word and of course that's exactly how
things did evolve because we could
imagine things long before we could
speak at least that's the theory so and
I represented that this is a image from
my book maps of meaning and so so the
idea is that this is the fundamental
representation of the unknown as such
it's half spirit because it partakes of
the air like a bird and it's half matter
because it's on the ground like a like a
like a
make and and that's what you think is
there when you don't know what is there
that's how your body reacts to what's
there when you don't know what is there
you know that too because if you're
alone at night you know it maybe you're
a little rattled up for one reason other
maybe you watched a horror movie and you
know there's some weird noise in the
other room it's dark and you could just
try this once it's like so you're on
edge
you think you want to turn the light on
and go in the room and see don't do that
just open the door a little bit and
sneak your hand in and just watch what
your imagination fills that room with
right and then then you remember what
it's like to be three years old in bed
in afraid of the dark
right and I read a good book on dragons
lately recently that that that had a
very interesting hypothesis about them I
thought one of the things the guy did
was track I can't remember his name
unfortunately track how common the image
of the dragon was worldwide it's
unbelievably widespread it's crazily
widespread and he thought that this was
actually the category of primate
predator and the predator was so
predator is a weird category right
because like there's there's crocodiles
in it and there's lions and they don't
have much in common except they eat you
so it's a functional category and so
this is the this is the imagistic
representation of the functional
category of predator and his predator
theory was well if you're a monkey then
a bird would pick you off like an eagle
and so that's this right and then if it
wasn't eagle it was a cat as they climb
teary trees and give you a good chomping
and then if it wasn't a cat and you go
down to the ground and a snake would get
you or maybe a snake would climb up the
tree because snakes like to do that and
get you and so that's a pre cat snake
basically free cat snake bird and that's
the thing you really that's the thing
you're really want to avoid you don't
want to come across one of those and so
and then you know the other thing it
does is breathe fire which is quite
interested because obviously fire was
both greatest friend and greatest enemy
of humanity and we've mastered fire for
a long time it might be as long as two
or three million years
that's what Richard rang him I think
it's rang ham he wrote a book recently
on I think it was Ragan
who wrote a book on when human beings
learned to cook that was about two
million years ago and cooking increased
the increase the availability of
calories you know how chimpanzees are
sort of shaped like a big like they're
ugly they're shaped like a big bowling
ball you know they're really they look
really fat and it's and they're short
and they're wide and that's because they
have intestinal tracts that are like you
know 300 miles long and the reason for
that is because they have to digest
leaves and so you go out in the forest
and like sit there and eat leaves for a
whole day and see how that works out for
you you know yeah they have no calories
in them so chimps spend about inkless I
think it's eight hours a day chewing and
it's because what they eat has no
nutritional value and then they have to
have this tremendous guts in order to
extract anything at all out of it human
beings at some point just thought Oh to
hell with that we'll cook something and
then we traded our guts for brain which
you know more or less has worked and I
think it's made us a lot more attractive
as well so okay well so the idea here
was that well that's the basic archetype
of the unknown as such and then I like
the st. George version of this it's so
cool because st. George lives in a like
a castle and the castle is partly
falling down and it's partly because
there's a dragon that's come up to like
it's an eternal dragon it's come back to
giver who in a rough time which always
happens because there isn't the eternal
dragon is always given are giving our
fallen down castles a rough time always
and so then st. George's the hero who
goes out to confront the dragon and he
frees the Virgin from its grasp and I
would say that's a pretty
straightforward story about the sexual
attractiveness of the masculine spirit
that's willing to forthrightly encounter
the unknown that's it looks just
straight looks like a straight
biological representation to me and it's
a really really old story right it's the
oldest written story we have and that's
basically the Mesopotamian creation myth
the Anu male ish which which basically
lays out precisely that story and so and
it's replayed I mean I bet you the movie
goers among you especially the ones that
are more attracted to the superhero you
know they're really flashy sort of
superhero type movies you've probably
seen the st. George story like 150 times
in the last 10 years you never get tired
of it because it's the central
story of mankind so you've got the
unknown as such and that is what you
react to with your body in the
existential terror and extraordinary
curiosity are gripping you and then it's
like the unknown unknowns that who's the
politician under Bush Rumsfeld yeah I
think the reason that that phrase caught
on so well is because he nailed an
archetype
there's unknown unknowns and there's
known unknowns and that's the unknown
unknown and you have to be able to react
to an unknown unknown because they can
get you and you can't just plead
ignorance because then you're dead that
doesn't work like human beings are the
sort of creature who has to know what to
do when they don't know what to do and
that's very paradoxical and what we do
is we prepare to do everything that's
right we're on guard we prepare to do
everything very very stressful and but
also very engaging and very very much
something that heightens consciousness
and maybe those circuits are permanently
turned on in human beings because we
also know that we're going to die and no
other animal knows that and so sometimes
I think that our that our stress
circuits are just on all the time and
that's part of what accounts for our
heightened consciousness so you have
your unknown unknowns and then you have
your relatively you have the unknowns
that you actually encounter in the world
like the mystery of your of your
romantic partner when you have a fight
with them it's like well we're having a
fight who the hell are you I mean you're
not the absolute unknown because I know
something about you but you're the
unknown as its manifesting itself to me
right now right and and and then there's
a known that we inhabit and then there's
the knower and the known is given
symbolic representation as far as I've
been able to tell in patriarchal form in
the form of male deities and the unknown
as you encountered it's given feminine
form so we won't get into that too much
but but if you're interested in that you
could look at my maps of meetings
lectures or maybe take a look at the
book but I think it's a good I think
it's a good schema for religious
archetypes I've worked on a long time it
seems to fit the union criteria quite
nicely it maps nicely onto Joseph
Campbell's ideas he got almost all has
ideas from you however and it also makes
sense from a biological and an evolution
a perspective as far as I can tell
that's a lot of cross validation at
least in my estimation so okay so back
to the hierarchy of dominance well let's
take a look at it a little bit so I'm
quite enamored of lobsters as some of
you might know because I found out this
just blew me away when I found it out I
mean I I've done a lot of work in neuro
chemistry some similar chemistry because
I used to study alcoholism and drug
abuse and alcoholism to study alcohol
you have to know a lot about the brain
because alcohol goes everywhere in the
brain it affects every neural chemical
system and so if you're going to study
alcohol it kind of has to study neuro
chemistry in general and so I did that
for quite a long time I really got in a
Murud of a book called the neuro
psychology of anxiety by Jeffery gray
which is an absolute work of genius
although extraordinarily did I don't
know how many references that book has
it's like must be a thousand and gray
actually read them and worse he
understood them and then and then he and
then he integrated them into this book
and so to read it you have to really
master functional neural chemistry and
animal behaviorism and and motivation
and emotion and neural Anatomy like it's
a killer book but man it's really rich
and it's taken psychologists about 40
years to really unpack that book but one
of the things I learned about that was
just exactly how much continuity there
was in the neural chemistry of human
beings in the neural chemistry of
animals it's absolutely staggering it's
the sort of thing that makes the fact of
evolution something like self evident I
do think it's self-evident for other
reasons that I'll tell you about later I
think evolution or I think natural
selection random mutation and natural
selection is the only way you can solve
the problem of how to deal with an
environment that's complex beyond your
ability to comprehend I think what you
do is you generate endless variants
because god only knows what the hell's
going to happen next they all almost all
of them die because they're failures and
a couple propagate and you know the
environment keeps moving around like a
giant snake you never know what it's
going to do next and so the best you can
do is say well here's thirty things that
might work and you know twenty-eight of
them are going to perish if you're if
you're an insect it's like the ratio is
way way higher than that so anyways back
to the lobsters
in all of these so these creatures
engage in in dominance disputes and and
I think dominance is the right way to
think about it because lobsters aren't
very empathic and they're not very
social and so it really is the toughest
lobster that wins you know and what's so
cool about the lobster is that when a
lobster wins he flexes and gets bigger
so he looks bigger because he's a winner
it's like he's advertising that and the
biological the neurochemical system that
makes him flex is serotonergic and you
think well who cares what the hell does
that mean well tell you what it means
it's the same chemical that's affected
by antidepressants in human beings and
so like if you're depressed you're a
defeated lobster like you're like this
I'm small I'm not you know things are
dangerous I don't want to fight you give
someone an antidepressant it's like up
they stretch and then they're ready to
like take on the world again well if you
give lobsters who just got defeated in
the fight serotonin then they stretch
out and they'll fight again and that's
like we separated from those creatures
on the evolutionary timescale somewhere
between 350 and 600 million years ago
and the damn neuro chemistry is the same
and so that's another indication of just
how important hierarchies of authority
are I mean they've been conserved since
the time of lobsters right there weren't
trees around when lobsters first first
manifested themselves on the planet and
so what that means is these hierarchies
that I've been talking about those
things are older than trees and so one
of the truisms for what constitutes real
from a Darwinian perspective is that
which has been around the longest period
of time right because it's had the
longest period of time to exert
selection pressure well we know we
evolved and lived in trees something on
the order of 60 million years ago we're
talking ten times as far back as that
for the hierarchy and so the idea that
human beings that the hierarchy is
something that has exerted selection
pressure on human beings is I don't
think that's a disputable that's not a
disputable issue how it's done it and
exactly what that means we can argue
about but like that sort of biological
continuity is just absolutely
unbelievable I it was funny because I
revealed this finding
I didn't discover this I read about it
but I talked to my graduate students
about I used to take them out for
breakfast you know and they were very
contentious snappy Bunch
and and they're always trying to one-up
each other and they're quite witty and
for like six months until it got very
annoying every time one of them went up
the other they'd stretch themselves out
like snap their hands like so that was
that was very funny it was really very
funny so you see this in lobsters and so
that's pretty amazing
so you know and one of the other thing
that's really cool about lobsters is
that let's say you've been like talk
lobster for a long time but you're
getting kind of old and some young
lobster just you know whales the hell
out of you and and so you're all
depressed but thing is your brain is
dominant but you don't have much of a
brain because you're a lobster and so
now what are you going to do because you
just lost and the answer is while your
brain will dissolve and then you'll grow
a subordinate brain yeah so that's we're
thinking about two right here for a
couple of reasons first of all if any of
you have ever been seriously defeated in
life you know what that's like it's like
it's a death a descent a dissolution and
if you're lucky a regrowth and and maybe
not as the same person that's what
happens to people with post-traumatic
stress disorder right their brains
undergo permanent neurological
transformation and they then inhabit a
world it's much more dangerous than the
world that they inhabited to begin with
but we also know - if you have
post-traumatic stress disorder or
depression that your hippocampus shrinks
right it dies and shrinks and you can
sometimes get it to grow back your
hippocampus shrinks and your amygdala
grows and the amygdala increases
emotional sensitivity and the
hippocampus inhibits emotional
sensitivity and so if you've been badly
defeated the hippocampus shrinks and the
amygdala grows now if you recover the
hippocampus will regrow and the
antidepressants actually seem to help
that but the damn amygdala never shrinks
again and so well so that's another
lesson from the lobster it's quite a
terrifying one but but it's one like
it's so interesting that you can relate
to that right it's like I get what that
poor crustacean is going through you
know
so okay here's the rats and this is from
yak Bank steps work rat he was the first
guy who figured out the rats giggle and
you might think well what kind of stupid
thing is that to study is like $50,000
research grant for giggling rats you
know aside but he discovered the play
circuitry in mammals that's a big deal
right it's like discovering a whole new
continent there's a play circuit enamels
it's built right in so it's not socially
constructed there's a there's a
biological platform for that and so what
panksepp would do with rats he found out
if rats if you take a rat puff away from
its mother it dies even if you feed it
even if you keep it warm it dies now you
can stop it from dying by taking a
pencil with an eraser on the end and
massaging it right because rats won't
live without love and the same thing
happens to human babies and we saw that
Romania when there was that catastrophe
have to tell chesco in the orphanages
where the orphanages were full of
unwanted babies because Ceausescu
insisted that every Romanian woman was
constantly pregnant so the orphan is
just stacked up with unwanted babies
lots of them didn't even have names and
they were warehoused warm shelter food
devastating lots of them died most of
them died before the first year and the
ones that didn't die were permanently
dysfunctional because you have to be
touched if you're a human being it's not
an option you have to be played with
it's not an option it's it's part of
neural developmental necessity and you
have to also play fair so because
otherwise you produce a very disjointed
child who isn't able to engage in the
niceties of social interaction which is
continual play in some sense and
reciprocity so what panksepp did with
his rat he noticed that male rats
juveniles really liked to wrestle and
they wrestle just like humans beings
wrestle they pinned each other for
crying out loud with like that that rat
has just lost he's down for a ten count
right and so so what you do is you take
juvenile rats and you can find out that
they want to play because you can attach
a spring to them and then they'll try to
run and you can measure how hard they're
running by how hard they're pulling on
the spring and then you can estimate how
motivated they are and so you can find
out that
well fed rat who doesn't have anything
on his mind will still work hard to play
if to enter an arena where he's been
allowed to play before he'll work for
that so that you think while the rats
motivated so the two rats go out there
and they play and and so they're playing
like dogs play and everyone knows what
that looks like if you're you know what
you have any sense about dogs they kind
of go like this and kids do that and
maybe you do that with your wife if
you're gonna play with her a little bit
okay my poor my poor wife man when she
huh she was a she was a young she had
older siblings and so she wasn't played
with as much when she was little as she
might have been and I used to like you
know what you take a pill away and you
go like this three times right that
means look out a pillow is coming your
way so I go one two three Wow but she
looked she was completely dismayed at me
like what do you do that for and I
thought well I eventually taught her
that rule the other thing I used to do
[Applause]
the only thing I used to do you know it
said sometimes she'd come at me like
this when we were playing round and I
grabbed her wrist and I'd knock her for
her for her hamsters heard not close
together she used to just get completely
annoyed about that and I thought right
that's what you do you just opened your
hands well she didn't know that either
so she hadn't been played with enough
when she was a little rat and so
anyways anyway so you let the route the
little rats go out there right and so
let's imagine one of them is 10% bigger
than other and so that the 10% bigger
rat wins because 10% is enough in rat
way to ensure that you're going to be
the Pinner rather than the penny okay so
so that's fine so a knit net the rat the
rat pins the big rat pins a little rat
and now the big rat is the is the
authority rat and so then the next time
that the rats play the little rod has to
invite the big rat to play so the big
rats out there being cool and a little
that pops up and you know does the whole
will you play with me thing and the big
rat will deign to play with it but if
you pair them repeatedly unless the big
rat lets the little rat win 30 percent
of the time so little rat will not
invite him to play and panksepp
discovered that it's like I read that
that just blew me away it's like that is
so amazing because you see well first of
their there's an analogy to psays ideas
about the emergence of morality out of
play and human being so that was very
cool but the notion that that was built
in to rats at the level of wrestling was
and their social they're deeply social
animals right they have to know how to
get along with one another and most of
their authority disputes dominance
disputes you don't want them to end in
bloodshed and combat because you know if
your rat won and I'm rat 2 and we tear
each other to shreds in a dominance
dispute rat 3 is just going to move in
it's really not a great strategy and so
be better if we could settle our
differences you know somewhat peacefully
and so while so rat anyway
Peg's had figured out that rats play and
not only did they play they play fair
and they seemed to enjoy it he also
figured out this was really cool to that
if you give juvenile rats attention
deficit disorder drugs ritalin
suppresses prey play so that's worth
thinking about it's like well why do you
have to give juvenile human beings
amphetamines in school well because they
need to play well you know they don't
get to play you know get to wrestle
around I mean that's oppression as far
as I can tell they don't get to wrestle
around that's fine feed them some
amphetamines man that'll shut down the
old play circuits well
is the other problem is panksepp found
out that if you don't let juvenile male
rats play their prefrontal cortexes
don't develop properly surprise surprise
you're not letting them ensure it's like
what else would you expect so you know
that's something to think about really
hard I would say so well so there's some
wolves going at it and we're all hunting
not exactly there's some moves having an
authority dispute but more technically
speaking and a lot of its posturing you
know they tend they tend not well
socialized wolves tend not to hurt each
other during authority disputes because
well for over obvious reasons it's too
dangerous and so they have other ways of
demonstrating who should be listen to
authorities and there's chimps doing you
have this particular house I think if I
remember correctly I think it's right
this is a really cool picture because I
think this chimp chimps don't like
snakes by the way so for example if you
take a chimp that's never seen a snake
and you show it a snake it is not happy
it will get the hell away from that
snake if you bring a chimp anesthetized
into a roomful of chimps the chips will
all get away from that and then look at
the body they don't like that either and
if you bring a big snake into a chimp
cage even if the chimps have never seen
it like they'll get away from it and
then stare at it and chimps out in the
wild if they see a big snake they'll
they'll stand there and they have a
noise that means it's like holy crap
that's a big snake you know it actually
means that technically I'll tell you why
in a minute
but they get they stand away from it
then they make this this noise which
means oh my god look at the snake and
then they'll stand there for like 24
hours looking at the snake and so the
snakes are really really they're super
stimuli for chimpanzees so that's pretty
interesting in this chimp seem to learn
how to take this dead snake and go scare
other chips with it and that was
that was hardly how he established his
authority and you know and while there
there's a there's a there's a threat and
you like if I was you and I was around
that chimp I would take that threat
seriously because those things are no
joke man and you see the same thing here
with the I don't remember what kind of
monkey that is but they're engaged in
agonistic behavior and so from so and
there has been by the way there has been
recent research showing that in higher
order primates that there is snake
detection circuitry that's built into
them right so it's not learned it's not
learned deeper than that now for a long
time psychologist psychologist knew for
a long time that I could make you afraid
in a conditioning experience experiment
much faster using a snake or a picture
of the snake than a gun or a picture of
a gun so we can learn fear to snakes
very rapidly spiders as well and so then
people thought well maybe we were
prepared to develop fear to snakes or
spiders that sort of thing but the more
recent research has indicated that it's
more than just prepared is that we have
the detection circuitry built right into
us and well is because well why wouldn't
we that's that's really the issue it's
like it's not really that much of a
surprise unless you think of human
beings as a blank slate and if you think
that been I don't know you should crawl
out of the 16th century that's that's
all I would look I would look at it
because I mean that's that's that's just
go on that idea it's it's it's so wrong
so so maybe you can think about this as
a dominance hierarchy but wolves look
for those wolves look for credibility
and competence as well and and
chimpanzees don't like brutal tyrants
and so we'll talk about it as the
hierarchy of authority and so well this
is kind of how it starts to develop you
know you see well these girls are
negotiating the domestic environment
here and how to behave properly and how
to share and all that and turn and take
turns and so they're negotiating the
hierarchy of authority and if you're
good at reciprocity it's sometimes
you're the authority and sometimes the
other person is the authority that's
fair play right and so these boys are
doing the same thing and you see they're
all smiling away and so it looks like
aggressive behavior and people who are
not
very attentive and who are paranoid and
who don't like human beings can confuse
this with aggression and they forbid it
at schools which is you know I know when
my kids were going to school for example
this was quite a while ago now they were
forbidden to pick up snow on the off
chance they might throw a snowball and
we know how terrible that is so what I
told my son was that he was perfectly
welcome to Pelt any teacher he wanted to
in the back of the head with the
snowball as long as he was willing to
suffer the consequences of doing it and
I don't know if he ever did but he was
happy with he was certainly happy with
the idea which made me very happy about
him so yeah so so you know kids need to
do this they really really seriously
need to do this it's what civilize --is
them and they that needs to happen
between the ages of two and four because
if they're not civilized by the time
they're 4 then you might as well just
forget it
and that's a that's a horrible statistic
but it's unbelievably well borne out in
the relevant developmental literature
like there's lots of aggressive
two-year-olds most of them are male and
if they stay aggressive past the age of
four they tend to be lifetime aggressive
they make no friends they're outcasts
they're much more likely to end up
antisocial criminal delinquent and in
jail and so your kids need to be
socialized between the ages of two and
four and that's particularly true for
the more aggressive males and most of
the rest of two-year-olds are male and
that isn't socialization by the way so
there's a more--not more abstract
representation of the same sort of thing
and I'm trying to make the case that
this that the that the hierarchy of
authority emerges out of a game-like
matrix an underlying game-like matrix
and that's one of the things that one of
the things that's so brilliant about
Jean Piaget he figured that out it's so
smart and he was interested in the
biological origin of morality and he
identified it he he he traced the origin
to play and the emergence of morality
out of play and that's it's so smart
it's just I just can't believe how smart
an idea that was because it's the
bottom-up construction of of morality
now Piaget was a constructionist and to
some degree social constructionist he
underestimated the role of
biology but that doesn't invalidate his
theory it's really easy to put a
biological underpinning underneath
underneath pas theory we know the
biology well enough to do it quite quite
nicely now so I mean we well the fact
that tanks have for example could
identify the play circuit is a really
good start with that right because play
has been around so long that we have a
circuit that's dedicated to it and so
that's that's a very very ancient that's
a very ancient issue and so you know
this is this is very much of an
abstraction of a game here and then of
course you get the ultimate abstraction
in representation what in a
representation like like that where even
though even the landscape of the game is
fictional and of course we've migrated
to a large degree into those sorts of
fictional landscapes fictional books
movies video games so it's the same it's
an extension of the same thing so
practice for practice for real life the
shades in some cases into real life
itself so alright more representations
of God the Father I like these
representations I like the triangle idea
I mean I don't know why God is wearing a
triangular hat it's kind of a strange
fashion choice but I think it's
associated with the idea of the pyramid
and I think that's associated with the
idea of the hierarchy of authority and I
think that's why the Egyptians put their
pharaohs inside pyramids I know there's
more to it than that but I think some of
that has to do with the notion of this
hierarchical structure you see this on
that now that's speculative obviously
and I don't want to make too much of it
but but I can't help but think that
there's something to that see that's on
the back of the American dollar bill I
like that a lot that's like the Eye of
Horus from the Egyptians and so the idea
here is something like at the top of the
hierarchy is something that is no longer
part of the hierarchy right so if you
move up the hierarchy enough what
happens is that you develop the ability
as a consequence of moving up that
hierarchy to be detached enough from the
hierarchy so you're no longer really
part of it and so that you can move in
all sorts of different hierarchies and
the thing the idea here is that the
thing that you're really developing is
the capacity to pay attention and I
would say from a from
mythological perspective the the one
thing that seems to compete with the
idea of the spoken word as the as the
source of the extraction of habitable
order from chaos is the I is the
capacity to pay attention so Marduk for
example the Mesopotamian Creator God who
emerged in the hierarchy of Mesopotamian
gods and came out at the top right he
was the victor of the gods he had eyes
all the way around his head and he could
speak magic words and I really like that
I really like that idea and the
Egyptians developed that idea too
because their god Horus was the eye
everyone knew was the Eye of Horus that
that sense that image is so compelling
that we still know about everybody has
seen the Eye of Horus with a really open
pupil and what the Egyptians learned was
that the open eye was what revivified
the Dead Society it's so smart so what
do you do if your life isn't in order
bloody well pay attention and that isn't
the same as thinking it's a different
process paying attention thinking is
like the imposition of structure in some
sense I know I'm oversimplifying but
paying attention is something like
watching for what you don't know and so
like one of the things I often recommend
to my clinical clients if they're having
trouble with a family member is number
one shut up don't tell them anything
about yourself just and I don't mean in
a rude way it's just like no more
personal information number two watch
them like a hawk and listen and if you
do that long enough they will tell you
exactly what they're up to and they will
also tell you who they think you are and
then you'll be shocked because they
think you're something generally
speaking that's not like you what you
are at all and when they tell you it's
like a revelation to both of you but
attention is an unbelievably powerful
force and you see this in psychotherapy
too because a lot of what you do and in
any reparative relationship is really
pay attention to another person pay
attention and listen and you would not
believe what people will tell you or
reveal to you if you watch them as if
you want to know instead of watching
them so that you'll have your prejudices
reinforced that's usually how people
interact is like I want to keep thinking
about you the way I'm thinking about you
and so I'm going to filter out anything
that just proves my theory that's not
what I'm talking about at all it's like
I'm going to watch you and figure out
what you're up to not in a rude way none
of that I just want to see what's there
and that'll be good for you probably and
also be good for me and so well so
that's the idea that you know climbing
up a hierarchy of authority can give you
vision and that vision can transcend the
actual hierarchy and I think that's also
the I think that's also the that's the
metaphysical space that an artist
occupies because artists really aren't
in a hierarchy there outside of
hierarchies you've watched the Lion King
most of you yeah that's that zoo you
know the little bird that's the eye of
the king that's the same thing there so
and that's that's echoed in this idea as
well so so well that's some more more
ideas of hierarchies same idea this is
right gold silver bronze why gold gold
is the Sun Gold is pure right so the
idea is that the thing that's at the top
of the hierarchy is incorruptible
because gold doesn't mix with anything
else right it's this sort of metal that
doesn't ever become corrupted it's a
noble metal it doesn't become corrupted
and so it shines like the Sun and it's
associated with what's ever at the top
of the hierarchy and the gold the gold
medal is a disc like the Sun and it's
awarded to those people who occupied the
top position and who are manifestations
of the ideal and here's here's I can
tell you a quick story so imagine that
you're watching an Olympic contest
I found this happens to me very often
with gymnastics because the gymnasts are
so absolutely unbelievable you know so
you go watch the gymnastic performance
and the verse is out there bouncing
around like you know you can't even
imagine doing it they're so perfect at
it so you see this person they're going
through this routine they're just
absolutely spectacular and flawless at
it you know at the end they stop and
everybody claps and and they're all
excited to see what a human being can do
and that's why we're in the audience
watching because we want to see what a
human being can do and the judges go
like 9.8 9.8 9.8 everybody's thrilled
and then the next contestant comes out
and it's like well they're just
basically screwed right it's like this
person came out there and was perfect
how are you going to top that that's an
interesting question because this
is a representation of what you do to
top perfection itself and you can do it
and here's how you do it and you know
this even though you don't know you know
it so let's say the next contestant
comes out they're kind of shaky because
it's like oh man the bar is being raised
high so what they do is they put
themselves right on the edge of chaos
and you can tell by watching them that
they are one bloody fraction of a second
from catastrophe they're pushing
themselves farther than they've ever
gone in the direction of their
perfection and everyone in the room is
so tense they can hardly stand it right
you can hear a pin drop and that person
is flipping around it they're just it's
just right on the edge of catastrophe
and at the end they go like this you
know and there's that gesture of triumph
that goes along with that and everybody
rises in one instant and just claps like
mad it's like well why what are you
doing
what are you doing when you're doing
that right you can't even help it it
grabs you right in the core of your
being and you stand up and it's it's an
act of worship that's what it is and you
saw someone go beyond their perfection
into the domain of chaos and establish
order right in front of your eyes and
you're so thrilled about that you know
you're happy to be alive and everyone's
celebrating it all at the same time and
it's an absolutely amazing thing and
that's what well sometimes that's what
this represents and sometimes that's
what this represents and that's what
we're trying to get at because that's at
the pinnacle of the hierarchy right not
only are you doing what you should be
doing but you're doing it in a way that
increases the probability that you'll do
it better the next time you do it and
then you could say here's another thing
to think about along the same lines and
I know we haven't got that out of an
easy yet you tell your kids to play fair
right you say Norman it's not whether
not you win it's how you play the game
and you say that you don't really know
what you mean you feel kind of stupid
saying it even though you know it's true
and your kid looks at you like there's
something wrong with you because he
doesn't know what you're talking about
either but you know it's true and so
here's why it's true life isn't a game
it's a set of games and the rule is
never sacrifice victory across the set
of games for victory and
one game right and that's what it means
to play properly you want to play so
that people keep inviting you to play
because that's how you win right you win
by being invited to play the largest
possible array of games and the way you
do that is by manifesting the fact that
you can play in a reciprocal manner
every time you play even if there's
victory at stake and that's what makes
you successful across time and we all
know that and we even tell our kids that
but we don't know that we know it and so
we're not adapting ourselves to the game
and victory in the game we're adapting
ourselves to the metagame and victory
across the set of all possible games and
that's what that well that's exactly
what as far as I can tell that's exactly
what this is aiming at to that that's
the same idea that there's that there's
a transit there's a mode of being that
transcends the particularities of the of
the localized contests that's the other
way to think about it and to act morally
is not to win today's contest at the
expense of the rest of possible contests
and again I don't see that as something
that's arbitrary it's not relativistic
there's an absolute moral an absolute
moral stance there and everyone
recognizes it and and I also think it's
the key to success and I would also say
it's very much akin in a strange way
like the the the person who is the
master at being invited to play the
largest possible games number of games
is also the same person I haven't quite
figured out the precise relationship
between these two is also the same
person that goes out forthrightly to
conquer the unknown before it presents
itself as the enemy at the door they're
the same thing now I don't I can't
haven't figured well why that is exactly
but but well I'll figure it out
eventually and when I do I'll don't tell
you well if you're interested so okay so
here's the mother no ideas of God as as
hierarchical authority figures so strip
the religious preconceptions off what
you observe and just look at what you
see well look there's primate looking
upward ad dominance figure that's that's
what you see there now it's very
interestingly symbolically represented
because you have gone
the farther there with the cross and I
think what that means as far as I can
tell is that there's a recognition there
in the image that the person who's most
dominant is the one who's or the most
have the most authority is the one who's
voluntarily accepted the suffering
that's part of being and that's what
that picture represents it's like the
authority holds that says this is what
you have to accept and that that that
that transfix is the viewer because of
because of the fact that it's true and
you think well is that true okay well
think about it this way
do you like brave people or do you like
cowards well that that's pretty
straightforward and what's the ultimate
act of bravery it's to come to terms
with the fact that you're mortal and
limited and to live forthrightly
regardless well obviously that's at the
core of what's of what's admirable and
why would we presume that that's not the
case we act as if that's the case it's
what everyone dreams and wishes that
they could they could do I mean assuming
that you know you've dispensed with the
idea that you're going to be immortal I
suppose that might be worth wishing for
too or or perhaps not immortal is a very
long time but you certainly want this
and that image says well this is what
you should be and you know we've got
that same opening into the sky going on
in that image that I showed you before
it's like this is a transcendent truth
that constantly reman efest itself
across time and space and Jung would say
it's built into your psyche that image
now you know there are elements of it
that are culturally constructed it
wouldn't necessarily have to be the
cross
although the cross is a very old symbol
it's far older than then it's use in
Christianity it has been used in many
many religious representations but that
echoes the soul echoes with that you
know and well then there's Moses up
there on the on the Mount receiving
these the the law and so we'll talk a
lot more about that when we get to
Exodus but if yeah yeah yeah if we get
to Exodus so well look where does it
happen well on the mountain well that's
a pyramid that's up right that's optics
up it's it's up in
stratosphere is up in the sky where
where you look upward okay and and then
so what's happening to Moses well here
here's a bit of a clue as far as I can
tell I figured this out partly again by
reading Jean Piaget because one of the
things that PSA said about kids was that
they first learned to play a game but
they don't know what the rules are
meaning that if you have a bunch of kids
together they can play a game but if you
take one of the kids out of the game
when they're young say six and you say
what the rule are what are the rules
they can only sort of give you a
representation so you take six-year-old
one and he'll tell you some of the rules
and six-year-old two will tell you
different rules and and you know
six-year-old three will tell you
different rules but if you put them all
together they can play so they have the
knowledge embodied either individually
or in the group the knowledge is there
to be extracted well then they get a
little older they can extract the rules
and then they start to play by the rules
and then the CSA's last step was well
they didn't just the kids play by the
rules that they learned that they can
make the rules and he thought about that
as moral progression first you can play
then you can play by the rules then you
learn maybe because he didn't think
everyone learned this that you're
actually the master of the rules that
doesn't mean the rules are arbitrary but
it means that you could be the generator
of the rule that's assuming that you
know how to play the game and he thought
about that as a moral moral progression
and then I thought well that's exactly
what happened to Moses in in the story
of Exodus because Moses is out there
leading all those Israelites around and
like they don't have a law they don't
have a lawgiver
they have a tradition and they're all
like crabby because both are in a desert
it's like they're in a tyranny but now
they're in a desert it's like that's no
improvement so they're really getting
pretty bitchy about it and so they're
worshipping false idols and having one
catastrophe after another and they get
Moses to judge their conflicts so he
does that for god only knows how long
forever crabby Israelites come to Moses
and bitch at him it's like wow he did
this and she did that and and so then he
has to figure out how to make peace and
he does that so long that one of his I
think it's his father-in-law tells him
he has to stop doing it because he's
going to exhaust himself well then you
think well what's happening well and I'm
not assuming that this is a like a
literal
historical story I think again it's a
condensation well any group has a set of
customs just like a wolf pack does and
so then the customs are being manifest
in someone who's a genius is watching
and thinking okay well what's the rule
in this situation what's the rule in
this situation what's the rule in this
situation and then in his imagination
the rules turn into a hierarchy and then
he goes up on the mountain just bang and
he thinks oh my god here's the rules
that we've been living by all this time
and that's the revelation of the
commandments well and you think well how
else could it be you think the rules
came first and baying them came second
it's like no the rules come first sorry
the actions come first the obeying them
comes first and then you figure out what
everybody's up to you say hey look this
is what you've been up to all along
everybody goes oh yeah that seems to
make sense peak and if it didn't who
would follow them no one was going to
follow them if they don't match what's
already there you just think about that
is unjust and so that's that's portrayed
here as a cataclysmic human event it's
like oh my god we've been chimpanzees
we've been in this hierarchy of
authority for so long we have no idea
what we're doing and all of a sudden
poof it bursts into revelatory
consciousness and we could say here is
the law and you say well is it given by
God well hey it depends on what you mean
by God we could start with that
presupposition but it's not like it just
came out of nowhere it took it and this
is something else Nietzsche observed so
interestingly and he said you know that
a moral revelation was the consequence
of a tremendously long process of
initial construction and then
formulation thousands and thousands and
thousands and thousands of years of
custom a building custom before you get
the revelation of the articulated law
and that's a description of the pattern
that works let's say well what's the
pattern that works it's the game that
you can play with everybody else
day after day with no degeneration and
that's another thing Piaget figured out
it's so brilliant and that's his idea of
the equilibrate state it's an extension
of the menu' accounts idea about the
universe
maksim right act in a way so that each
action could become a universal rule
that was kinda mental moral Maxim and
PSA put a twist on that he said no no
that's not exactly yet it's act in such
a way that it works for you now and next
week and next month and next year and
ten years from now and so that while
it's working for you it's also working
for the people around you and for the
broader society and then and that's the
equilibrate estate and you could think
about that as an intimation of the
kingdom of the City of God on earth it's
something like that and it's based on
this idea that a morality has to be
iterable and you know there's lots of
there's been lots of simulations online
already artificial intelligence
simulations of trading games right I
mean the people who've been studying the
emergence of moral behavior say in
artificial intelligence systems have
already caught on to the idea that one
of the crucial elements to the analysis
of morality is inner ability
you can't play a degenerating game
because because it degenerates like
obviously you want to play a game that
at least remains stable across time and
God if you could really get your act
together maybe it would slowly get
better and of course that's what you'd
hope for your family right that's what
you're always trying to do unless you're
completely hell-bent on revenge and
destruction it's like is there a way
that we can continue to play together
that will make playing together even
better the next day that's what you're
up to and well I don't see anything
arbitrary about that and part of it this
is also why I think that bloody post
modernists are so incorrect because you
know they say something like there's an
infinite number of interpretations of
the world and that's actually true
but then they make a mistake and they
say well no interpretation is to be
privileged over any other interpretation
it's like wrong wrong that's that's
where things go seriously off the rails
because the interpretation has to be and
this is the piagetian objection is like
if you and i are going to play a game
rule one is we both have to want to play
rule two is other people are going to
let us play rule 3 is we should be able
to play it across a pretty long period
of time without it degenerating and
maybe rule 4 is well we're playing the
world
shouldn't kill us it's like there are
not very many gay like you don't send
your kids out to play on the
superhighway right so they're not
playing hockey on the superhighway
because the world kills them and so
there's an infinite number of
interpretations but there is not an
infinite number of solutions and the
solutions are constrained by the fact of
the world and are suffering in the world
and then also constrained by the fact
that we constrain each other and so
that's that's where I think that's gone
like dreadfully dreadfully wrong so all
right it's really fun to look at these
old pictures once you kind of know what
they mean
you know the leaf that's what I've
discovered is that once I kind of
understand the underlying rationale for
I mean someone worked hard on that
that's an engraving right they took a
long time making that picture they're
serious about it and when you understand
what it means you know all those people
there their prostate prostrate at the at
the at the revelation of the law
it's like well no wonder it's like break
the law and see what happens breaks the
universal moral law man and see what
happens you know I see people in that
situation well as you all do all the
time perhaps me more than you because
I'm a clinical psychologist you know and
if the people I'm seeing haven't broken
the universal law then you can bloody
well be sure that people around them
have it's no joke like you make a
mistake and things will go seriously
wrong for you and so it's no wonder that
you'd be terrified at the revelation of
the structure that governs our being one
of the things that's so remarkable about
the old testament this is another thing
needs to comment a dog he was a real
admirer of the Old Testament not so much
of the New Testament he thought it was a
sin for Europe to have glued the New
Testament on to the Old Testament
because he thought the Old Testament was
a really accurate representation of the
phenomenology of ba it's like stay awake
speak properly be honest or watch the
hell out because things will come your
way that you just do not want to see at
all and it might not just be you it
might be everyone you know and
everything
about your culture that is demolished
for for generation after generation it's
like stay awake and be careful and I
like I think that people only don't
believe that when they're being
hubristic and I think that most people
know that deep in their hearts you know
when you get high on your horse that
happens fairly often if you have any
sense you think geez I better be careful
top myself down and fare a bit because
if I get too puffed up man something's
going to come along and take me out at
the knees and everyone knows that pride
comes before a fall it's like if you
have any that's why it says in the Old
Testament that fear of God is the
beginning of wisdom it's like I've never
in all my years as a clinical
psychologist and this is something that
really does terrify me I have I have
never seen anyone ever get away with
anything at all even once you know
there's that old idea that God has a
book you know and keeps track of
everything in heaven it's like okay okay
you know maybe it's not a book fine but
that is a really useful thing to think
about because well maybe you disagree
maybe you think people get away with
things all the time I tell you I've
never seen it what I see instead is that
thing happens right they someone twists
the fabric of reality and they do it
successfully because it doesn't snap
back at them that moment and then like
two years later something unravels and
they get walloped and they think oh my
god that's so unfair and then we track
it it's like but what happened before
that this and then what this and then
what this and then what oh oh this well
that's where it went wrong it's yeah
because you can't twist the fabric of
reality without having it snap back it
doesn't work that way and why would it
because what are you going to do twist
the fabric of reality I don't think so I
think it's bigger than you you know and
I think that one of the things that
really tempts people is the idea that
well I can get away with it it's like
yeah you try you see oh well that works
it's like you get away with nothing and
that is the beginning of wisdom and I
it's something that deeply terrifies me
and you know err ever since last
September when I came to board like
broader public attention one of the
thing I'd be terrified of making mistake
because I certainly know I'm more than
capable of making a mistake and
going so far either I haven't made one
or no one found out about it
so but it's like you know we walk on a
very thin and narrow edge and we're very
lucky when things aren't degenerating
into chaos around us or rapidly moving
too far too much order and it's not an
easy thing to stay on that line and you
can tell when you say you're on that
line because the things are deeply
meaningful and engaging when you're on
that line but if you're not
existentially terrified about the
consequences of wavering off that then
you are truly not awake so and that's
what I see in this picture you know it's
like look out man
because there are rules and if you break
them god help you
[Music]
so one of the things that seems to me
the case with regard this in the
question period a bit last time is that
one of the things that seems to be
actually one of the advantages to gluing
the New Testament on to the Old
Testament is the idea of a
transformation and morality that is
analogous to the PIA jetty an idea that
after you learn to play by the rules you
can learn to make the rules because I
think that's actually what happens to
some degree in the transition between
the Old Testament and the New Testament
because in the Old Testament most
morality is prohibition here are things
you shouldn't do it's like no fair
enough that's a lot of what you do with
your kids don't do this don't do this
don't especially when they're happy
you're always going around telling them
to stop being so happy because all
they're doing is causing trouble it's
quite painful if you're a parent and you
notice that but the first morality is
prohibition right control yourself so
you don't cause too much trouble and
then maybe if you get that down and
you're good at it then the next thing is
well once you're disciplined then you
can start working toward something
that's a positive good and that's the
transformation that seems to me to be
fundamentally characteristic of the
juxtaposition of the New Testament on to
the Old Testament but in these images is
still something like serve tradition
serve the father psychologically
speaking support the tradition because
you live on it they're in an old
Mesopotamian story the enumeration
you can which you can read about if
you're interested in the original gods
who are really badly behaved they're
like two year old in fact they're a lot
like two year olds they kill the
primordial gone absolute pea tree Oracle
God they kill him and try to live on his
corpse well that's what we all do right
because we live on the corpse of our
ancestors you could say we live on the
corpse of our culture it's dead and
that's not a great place to live so you
have to keep revivifying it so the damn
thing you know stays active and awake
you you stay on the carbs for too long
and then the devil or the demon of chaos
comes back and that's what happens in
the Mesopotamian story it's like don't
be thinking that you can stay on the
corpse of your ancestors for too long
without contributing to the
revivification of the system because the
chaos that all of that holds that that
all that holds that bay will definitely
come and visit you you see that in
stories like The Hobbit
you know hobbits they're nice they like
to eat they're kind of fat they're
shorts are not very bright you know
they're hubristic they have no idea
what's out there in the broader world
they're protected if you remember by the
Striders who are the sons of great kings
who look like tramps they have nothing
but contempt for them they patrol the
borders and keep the bloody hobbits safe
but out there out there in the periphery
all hell is brewing and chaos is is is
generating and forming and that's an
archetypal story and that's why people
like that story so much because that's
exactly right like we're the hobbits and
there are we are protected from chaos by
the spirits of our dead ancestors and
we're too damn stupid to know it and we
think oh well we don't need them anymore
and that to me that's post-modernism
that's what the bloody universities are
doing with the humanities to absolutely
appalling and we will pay for it so
unless we wake up and hopefully we'll
wake up because that would be better
than paying for it even though being
awake as well they're painful so so then
I had this vision one time and I kind of
portrayed it in this in this image of
what the world was like and I thought
well it's not a pyramid it's not a
single hierarchy of authority that's not
what it is it's it's an array of
hierarchies of authority so you imagine
this sort of infinite plane and the
the infinite plane there's nothing but
pyramids and inside the pyramids there
are strata of people everywhere far as
you can look some of the pyramids are
tall some of them are short they overlap
it's endless the plain is endless and
those are all the positions to which you
could rise and everybody's inside the
pyramid sort of crammed up trying to
move towards the top and then there's
the possibility of sailing across over
top of all of them and seeing how the
structure itself works and that's and
that's the eye that floats above the
pyramid and it sees the structure itself
and the highest order of being is not to
be at the top of the pyramid it's to use
the discipline that you attain by
striving towards the top of the pyramid
to release yourself from the pyramid and
move one step up and that's I think
that's one of the things that's
instantiated in the idea of the for
example of the Holy Ghost so and I think
that's akin to that that's Sisyphus and
needs a set of Sisyphus if I remember
correctly that one has to imagine him
happy well if there's a rock at the
bottom of the hill then you might as
well push it up the hill and if it rolls
back down well then you've got something
else to do don't you can push the damn
rock back up the hill and there's no
shortage of rocks to put up to push up
the hill and that's what we're built for
anyways and so let's go out and like
push some damn boulders up the hill and
then maybe we could have enough
self-confidence and enough enough
respect for ourselves that we wouldn't
have to turn to hatred and revenge and
try to take everything down because I
think that's the alternative so he's not
weak that's one thing you can say about
him the same idea represented there
right that's outlets who voluntarily
takes the world on his shoulders it's
like the idea of Christ
taking the sins of the world on his
shoulders it's exactly the same notion
which is the notion that you should be
able to recognize in yourself all the
horror of humanity and take
responsibility for it because that's
what that means and the thing that's so
interesting about that is that if you
can recognize yourself in yourself all
the horror of humanity you will
instantly have a hell of a lot more
respect for yourself than you did before
you did that because there's some real
utility and knowing that you're a
monster now on just because you're a
monster doesn't mean you have to be a
monster but it's really useful to know
that
you are one so then and one of the
things that you knew and this is
something that I find so amazing about
his writing is I think something that
really distinguishes him for example
from Joseph Campbell who talked about
following your bliss is like Jung said
very clearly that the first step to
enlightenment is the encounter with the
shadow and what he meant by that was
everything horrible that human beings
have done was done by human beings and
you're one of them and so if you don't
understand that and to understand that
really means to know how it was that you
could have done it and that's a
shattering thing to try to imagine that
to try to imagine yourself as someone
who's engaged in medieval torture to see
how you could in fact do that you're
never the same after you learn that
but being never the same after learning
that is unbelievably useful because when
you understand that that's what you're
like then you're a whole different
creature and I don't think and this is
something I did learn from Jung is that
you cannot be a good person until you
know how much evil you contain within
you it is not possible and it's partly
because you just don't have any potency
like if you're just naive if you're just
nice if you'd never hurt anyone you'd
never hurt a fly you don't have the
capability for any of that why would
anyone ever take you seriously you're
you're just you're a domestic animal at
best you know and a rather contemptible
one at that and it's a very strange
thing because you wouldn't think that
the revelation of the capacity for evil
is a precondition for the realization of
good but I believe first of all why
would you be serious enough to even
attempt to pursue the good unless you
had some sense of what the consequence
was of not doing it you have to be
serious about these sorts of things it's
not it's not it's not the game of a
child right it's the game of a fully
developed adult and you have learned
this in part when I had little kids I
wrote a chapter from my new book called
never let your children do anything that
makes you dislike them and why was that
and I read I read that wrote that after
I knew I was a monster and I thought I'm
going to make sure I liked my kids I'm
going to make sure they behave around me
so that I like them because I'm Way
bigger than them and I'm Way more cruel
than they are and I've got tricks up my
sleeve
that they cannot even possibly imagine
and if if they irritate me I will
absolutely take it out on them and if
you don't think that you're the sort of
person that would do that then you are
the sort of person who is doing it you
know we're not going to get that amenity
ha ha aria I watched this great
documentary once called Hitman Hart and
was about Bret Hart and who was the most
famous Canadian in the world for a while
and he was a worldwide Wrestling
Federation wrestler you know and he was
a good guy and he came from this famous
family of wrestlers who all came from
Alberta I think there were seven
brothers who were wrestlers and seven
sisters and all the sisters married
wrestlers and they were all offspring
children of Stu Hart who was a wrestling
impresario like 40 years ago and it was
it was such a cool documentary because I
was always wondering why in the world
did people watch wrestling and and then
believe it you know
believe it do you believe movies when
you go watch them it's like that's a
hard question to answer while you're
there you do and so if you're watching
wrestling and you're a wrestling fan do
you believe it well it is a matter of
belief it's a matter of being engaged in
a drama and there are different levels
of drama right so let's say worldwide
Wrestling Federation drama is not the
most sophisticated form of drama okay
but I'm not being a not being a smart
aleck when I'm saying that there is
drama of different sophistication for
different people and that's also why
religious truths exist at multiple
levels simultaneously right it is got to
be something in it for everyone and
that's a hard belief system that's a
hard system to put together something
for the unbelievably sophisticated and
something for the common person
okay so we have wrestling and Bret Hart
was a good guy and he fell into the
archetype of being a good guy and that's
partly what the what the story's about
it was a bit too much for him but um one
of the things that he he laid out so
carefully where
because he figured that 120 million
people knew him something like that and
that everywhere he went he was treated
like a hero and he found out quite a bit
of quite a burden as you could imagine
if you think about it but he portrayed
what was happening in the wrestling ring
as classic good against evil but not
conceptualized and discussed right
embodied thought out acted out you know
like like the like Thor and the Hulk
except like right in front of you and so
well that's exactly this sort of thing I
mean we could consider hockey more
sophisticated than wrestling perhaps and
as I said I'm not being a critic of
these I'm not being critically minded
about these things I understand their
purpose and I would highly recommend
that documentary it's a brilliant
documentary but this is it's the same
thing it's a silver cup right it's like
there's the hero of the team that's the
hero of the team's you know here's
something cool if you're the fan of the
Toronto Blue Jays are the Toronto Maple
Leafs of course this hardly ever happens
to you if you're the fan of the Toronto
Maple Leafs because they always lose but
haha but but if you're watching a game
and your team wins and we take your
testosterone levels then they went up
and if you watch the Toronto Maple Leafs
and they lost and you're a fan then your
testosterone levels go down so that's
pretty damn funny you know I mean really
don't you see how deeply instantiated
this is in people I mean it bloody well
alters your biochemistry like your your
your testosterone levels it's all more
my team loss you know it's like ah do we
know there'll be nothing in it for the
wife tonight you know
yeah well this is the cosmos I think
from from the phenomenological
perspective and one of the things that
that that has come to my realization is
that this is real this is real it's not
a metaphor it's way deeper than a
metaphor the most real things about life
are the place you don't know and the
place you know and you could say well
that's explored territory and unexplored
territory that's real and it's been
around forever
back to the lobsters you know if you put
lobsters in their new place the first
thing they do is go around their
territory finding places to hide and
also making a burrow so the first thing
they do is establish what they know
against what they don't know and that's
real it's real from the Darwinian
perspective and we're going to say that
what's real from the Darwinian
perspective is plenty real enough
because we're alive and everything and
so that sort of thing matters like well
that's what this is the Taoist symbol
that's what it says is that what way it
says what is experience made of
eternally that's easy chaos and order
and in every bit of chaos there's the
possibility of order and in every bit of
order there's the possibility of chaos
and that's the way right that's the path
of life that's life itself and where
you're supposed to be is right on the
border between the two of those and why
is that stable enough engaged enough
right so not only are you doing what you
should be doing you're doing in a way
that increases the probability that
you'll do it better tomorrow and you can
tell when you're doing that because
you're engaged you're in the right time
and place and your your neurology tells
you that that's what meaning is that's
what transcendent meaning is and that's
so cool because I also think that that
is the antidote to existential suffering
the antidote to existential suffering is
to be at the right place at the right
time and you know you want to get
technical about it okay anxiety and pain
that's the cause that's the reality of
the existential
so suffering okay so let's say you're in
the right place at the right time what
happens to you biochemically
dopaminergic activation what does that
do
suppresses anxiety and it's analgesic
now it's more than that because also
produces positive emotion and the desire
to move forward and it underlies
creativity and and so so not only do you
get the positive engagement from a
neurochemical perspective you get the
analgesia and you get the anti end and
you get the reduction of anxiety so it's
not hypothetical it's and it is the case
that the dopaminergic systems those are
the exploratory systems unbelievably
ancient and archaic are activated when
you're optimally positioned to be to be
what incorporating new information which
is what human beings do because we're
information foragers and so we want to
be secure but building on our security
at the same time and then we want to do
it for ourselves we want to do it for
other people we want to do it for our
families we want to do it for broader
society we want to bring the whole world
together in alignment to do that and
that's meaningful and god only knows
what we could do about the suffering of
the world if we did that you know we
have no idea what we could do if we
started doing things properly and maybe
so many of the things that dismay us
about life we could we could stop I mean
we stopped a lot of them in the last
hundred years you know things are a lot
better than they were a hundred years
ago obviously they're not perfect but a
hundred years ago 120 years ago man you
know the average person in the Western
world lived on less than a dollar a day
in today's dollars it's like you just
try that for a week and see how much fun
that is so the Daoists well what is this
well this is the pre cosmogonic chaos
out of which the Word of God extracted
habitable order at the beginning of time
it's the same thing it's the same thing
and that chaos
we'll talk a bit more about that later I
guess because it's a very complicated
thing to to describe but it's certainly
the thing that when you encounter the
chaos is what you encounter when the
Twin Towers fall right you remember what
that was like right so it was it was
September 10th well that was the world
everyone knew what the world was like
and then it was September 11th and
everyone walked around day
for three days because the building's
failed but so what you can see a
building fall you can understand what
it's what happens when a building falls
so then what's going on with the being
dazed well it's the chaos that underlies
our how to the Lord have manifested
itself in those buildings collapse was a
brilliant act of terrorism and everyone
was frozen and curious because that's
how we react to that sort of thing the
it's like it's like the shark you know
remember that famous that famous movie
poster for Jaws with the woman swimming
on the top of the water and that
terrible Leviathan shark underneath
coming up to to take her out well that's
life man that's the world and now and
then you see that and when something
Falls like the Twin Towers fall you
remember that the ocean below you the
abyss right the primordial abyss that
bloody thing is deep and then you're
fragile and that happens when someone
betrays you and it's happened it happens
to you when your dreams fall apart you
encounter that chaos again from which
the world is extracted and then you're
called upon to act out attention and the
word in order to bring the world back
into order and none of that is none of
that is superstitious none of that is
superstitious none of that's even
metaphorical it's real its ribs more
real than anything else and I think the
reason for that in part is that this has
been it's been this way forever right as
long as there's been life this has been
the rule of life and that's the cosmos
that's reality that's what we inhabit
and so one of the things you know the
the so-called New Atheists and I they
don't want to go on a tangent about New
Atheists because I think atheists are
often remarkably honest and very
consistent in their analysis so but I
just don't think they're taking the
problem seriously that like I don't
think they take their evolutionary
theorizing nearly with the seriousness
that it that it necessitates and I don't
think that I don't think that you can
dispute the proposition that the longer
something has had a selection effect
life the more real it is it's the
fundamental axiom of Darwinian biology
and I think the Darwinian world is more
real than the physical world that was
the argument that I was trying to have
with with Sam Harris and I didn't do the
world's best job with that although it
went not too bad the second time but
it's it's not something to be taken
lightly it's a very serious profound and
meaningful proposition and people act it
out and want to act it out whether they
know it or not that's Marduk so the
story of Marduk I'll just give it to you
very briefly time at an apse who are
locked in embrace at the beginning of
time goddess of saltwater God of
freshwater together
chaos an order right they give rise
masculine feminine they give rise to the
world of the elder gods and those are to
me their primordial motivational forces
or something like that and their rage
and their lust and their love and all
these things that possess us that are
there forever and they're out in the
world acting and they carelessly slay
absolu their father and they're making a
racket and then they collapse ooh and
then time at gives wind of that and
that's a timeout right there by the way
she's kind of a rough looking creature
and she's a mother of all things and so
she's not very happy about this they
said though these her children have
destroyed structure itself plus they're
noisy and careless and so she thinks all
right just like Noah just like the God
that brings the flood to know what
exactly the same idea time ad comes back
it says yeah okay enough is enough I'm
going to take you out and she makes this
battalion of monsters and puts the worst
monster there is at the head of the
battalion his name is king he's like a
precursor to the idea of Satan and she
lets the gods know hey I'm coming for
you and so they're not very happy about
this because their gods but like yeah
she's chaos itself right she gave birth
to everything this is no joke and so
they send one God out after another to
confront her and they all come back with
the tails between their legs there's no
hope and then one day there's a new God
that emerges in that
Marduk and the gods know as soon as he
pops up they know he's something new
remember and this is happening while the
Mesopotamians are assembling themselves
into one of the world's first great
civilizations so all the gods of all
those tribes are coming together to
organize themselves into a hierarchy to
figure out what proposition rules
everything and so Marduk is elected by
all the gods and he says look I'll go
out there and I'll take on time at but
here's the rule from here on you follow
me I determine destiny I'm the top god
I'm the thing at the top of the
hierarchy and all the other gods say hey
look no problem you get rid of chaos we
do exactly what you say now Marduk he
has eyes all the way around his head and
he speaks magic words
those are his primary attributes and so
he takes a net and he goes out to
confront time out and and he he he
encloses her in a net which i think is
so cool because it's an encapsulation
right it's a conceptual encapsulation he
encloses chaos itself in a conceptual
structure he puts it in the net and then
he cuts her into pieces and he makes the
world and then then he creates human
beings to inhabit that world and to
serve the gods and he creates human
beings out of the blood of king of the
worst of the demons and that took me to
call into young as the student might
help me figure that out I thought that's
pretty damn pessimistic it's like you
know what exactly it sounds like a fall
metaphor it's like the idea of original
sin but but our joint conclusion with
regards to that with it human beings are
the only creatures in creation that can
truly deceive right we have the capacity
for evil just like it says in the Adam
and Eve story we can actually do that
and that's why we're made out of the
blood of king of the king of the demons
the we are the thing that can deceive
that can twist the structure of reality
well so Marduk now the Mesopotamians had
an emperor right
and the emperor was the avatar of Marduk
that's what made him Emperor he was only
at Emperor if he was going to be Marduk
he had to be a good Marduk which Mantia
do confront time at chaos and cut her
off and make or
out of her pieces and what the method
name is used to do at the New Year's
celebration they go outside the walled
city and that's explored territory
versus unexplored territory they go
outside their walled city into chaos and
they bring all the statues that
represented the gods and they'd act this
out because they're trying to figure
something out right you're trying to
figure out what this means they're
acting it out and then they take their
Emperor and the priest would make them
kneel and they'd take all his king
equally all his king uniform off his
Emperor uniform off and make him kneel
and humiliate him and nail him with a
glove and say okay how were you not a
good Marduk this year right and then
he'd recount all the ways that he was
inadequate in confronting chaos and then
they do the celebration and Marduk would
win and and the king would go sleep with
a royal prostitute and and the reason
for that was it's the same idea st.
George pulling the Virgin from the
dragon it's exactly the same idea that
if you call if you encounter the
reptilian chaos you can extract
something out of it with which if you
unite you produce creative order that's
what they were acting out and that was
the basis for the Mesopotamian idea of
sovereignty it's so smart it's so
unbelievably smart and you know the
Mesopotamians had a massive influence on
the civilizations that then had a
massive influence on assets one of the
stories of how the notion of sovereignty
itself came to be it's the evolution of
the idea of God that's one way of
thinking about it but even more
importantly it's the evolution of the
idea of the redemptive human being right
and that's taken - it's one of its
conclusions following the story of
Buddha but also in the story of Christ
the idea of the perfect individual and
the notion is well that's the word that
speaks truth into chaos at the beginning
of time to generate habitable order that
is good that's the story and so with
that
let's see oh sure I'll just show you
these pictures because they're so
interesting once you know what they mean
they're so cool that's a symbol of
infinity
let's Hercules and Hydra what's life
like cut off one head what happens seven
more grow right what do you do run hold
well no that's not what you do it this
is what you do you fight it it's the
it's the chaos that generates partial
chaos it's the ultimate chaos that
generates partial chaos but that chaos
also is what revista finds life because
otherwise it would just be static
mercury the head of the Hydra right
freeze of you I'd Saint George he's
doing it peacefully which is so
interesting right he's got a beatific
look on his face in that particular
representation another Saint George
right the Virgin in the background I
think that's say Dan if I remember
correctly st. George is the patron saint
of England here's an interesting one
this actually sheds light on on the
human proclivity for warfare st. George
that's a Muslim soldier it's really easy
to transform the enemy into the dragon
right because the enemy is often the
predator and we do that instantaneously
right without a second thought and so
then we can go to war morally because
why not take out the snakes well you
know the problem is where are the snakes
or maybe they're outside and maybe
they're not maybe they're in this room
and even worse maybe they're in you and
that's wisdom when you know that their
review why wouldn't she be happy about
that especially if she had a especially
if she had a child right seriously
and that's horace right the god of
vision and he was a he was a Falken
because falcons have great vision and
they fly above everything and they can
see everything so that was the Egyptian
created god Horus and I'll tell you the
story about Horus at some points well
now here are some pictures that
demonstrate what I had described as the
emergence of let's say the meta hero out
of the hero so there's the person you
admire and then there's the set of
people that you admire and then there's
the meta set of admirable people and the
extraction of that ideal as far as I can
tell that's just what's portrayed in
these images that's a great one it's
very sophisticated image you see that
the two sides of Christ's face are not
symmetrical one is God in ones man
that's what that icon means and so the
fully developed person in this
representation it's one of the oldest
representations of this sort that we
know the idea is that there's a there's
a human person in his ordinariness let's
say and then there's this this kinship
with the divine that's associated with
the willing adoption of the
responsibilities of moral mortal being
and that produces this union and then
it's manifest in a book right because
that's speech and it's associated with
the son right it's the proper way of
being and that's a perfect example I
think of the emergence of the archetype
out of the multitude that's what it
looks like to me
and so I guess now we're done with
Genesis one and took three lectures but
God's complicated you know that's the
thing so
[Applause]
[Music]
[Applause]
so thank you and next week by all
appearances that's where we are so we've
got 20 minutes for questions so in the
past I've done some work with blog Big
Brother Big Sister and whatever that
being said that the most common story I
tend to hear from Pacific youth is that
they write they're raised in a single
family home usually with a mom daddy's
there on a picture in alcoholic whatever
whatever the writer so we have this
child who is trying to seek ways to make
himself healthy and empower himself in a
ways that a healthy father should have
done so you know between the formative
years of like 1 to 4 so I think you know
I'm going with this how let's say for
someone who born without like a good
father figure where would they go out in
the world or like what for series of
incidents where they try to expose
themselves to to like gain access to
that balancing of health and knowledge
that a father though a good father
figure should have provided to in the
first place
ok well partly I mean certainly to some
degree a good mother can provide that
right to some degree although it's hard
for one person to be everything right
you know and I think one of the
conundrums that face women and this is a
tough one and this is why I think women
are higher in trade agreeableness and
higher and trade negative emotion is
that you know the primary problem that a
woman has with an infant is why not
throw it out a window because it's very
annoying right I mean it's there all the
time it's constant demand it's
absolutely constant amount tremendous
dependency and so a woman has to be
tilted towards mercy that's how it looks
to me right and especially during it's
so important during the especially the
first year when children are so
unbelievably vulnerable and so I think
it's very difficult for women to be
merciful like that and to make the shift
to encouraging disciplinarian I think
that's a very difficult thing for people
to do simultaneously although you know
people people I'm not saying that women
are always only merciful and men are
always only encouraging disciplinarians
but things do sort themselves out to
some degree like that and I think also
the biochemical transformations that
accompany pregnancy and childbirth and
lactation also tilt a mother towards
that as well we have to really love that
little thing right
it's it's number one no matter what it
demands and then telling it what to do
and making sure it's behaving properly
that's that's a whole different issue
now but the kids who lack fathers I mean
first of all they can find that to some
degree in their friends and that's often
what father boys do in particular they
go into gangs and they generate the
missing men masculinity in the game well
that's not so good because like what the
hell do they know well they don't know
anything right they're just stupid kids
and they're like fifteen years old and
the testosterone is pumping and they're
trying to get the hell away from their
mother which is what they're supposed to
do and and they're not in the right
position to exercise any authority over
themselves so that's that's not good
they can find it in education they can
find it in books they can find it in
movies they can find it in sports heroes
and so forth because the image of the
father is fragmented and distributed
among the community but it's very very
difficult to not have a father right and
you know one of the things that we're
doing in our society which i think is I
think it's absolutely appalling is that
we're making the case that all families
are equal it's like sorry no wrong then
there's no empirical data supporting
that proposition by the way it's much
better for kids to have two parents know
who those parents are that's a whole
different issue okay and if I could just
add one more thing of how would you ask
that question so let's see a daughter
was raised not a father because she
would all see have different ways to
find those fragments of her missing
father than like a boy would instead
because obviously they're raised
differently at least they should have
been well I think it's the same issue
you know I mean I think that another
danger that emerges mrs. Freud's of
course famous observation is that you
know if there's mom and child were
father and child that relationship can
get a little closer than it should and
then the lines get blurry and mixed and
I'm not saying that that happens to
everyone obviously but but it's still a
danger that that's inherent in the
situation they're thrust together too
tightly without sufficient resources and
so the responsibility has to be
distributed more and like I really do
think that it's the sign of the
degeneration of the society when that
when when single parenthood becomes
anything approximating the norm it's not
a good idea
then the and part of the reason I
believe that and I think this has to do
with the
overwhelming selfishness of modern life
is that marriage isn't for the people
who are married it's for the children
obviously and like if you can't handle
that grow the hell up
see right now I mean seriously yeah
seriously
thank you once you once you have kids it
is not about you period
now that doesn't mean it isn't about you
at all but that just seems so
self-evident to me I can't believe that
anybody would even would even question
it
oh it's Dino Larson oh yes well I'm
certainly aware of that yes it's
questioned it's almost illegal to
question it now you know to to or
illegal to make the set of propositions
that I'm making so that's the best I can
do guys excellent thank you
the question is going in part two the
first part of first up here lecture but
it's also something that's been on my
mind listening to your lectures over the
past few months and that's when we talk
about the psychological truth or
significance of the Bible to what extent
does that psychological psychological
truth has to be embodied in specific
historical events or people and so for
instance the thing that sort of been
bugging on my mind there's there's a
part that st. Paul is talking about in
the New Testament somewhere in one of
his letters and he's talking to the
resurrection and he says if it didn't
happen then if this whole thing just
means the faith is meaningless like for
him there had to be that embodiment of
that his capital yes the nor event in
that case well the best answer I have to
that at the moment is that I'm really
happy that I'm not at that point yet in
this lecture series
you know because because that there's a
there's a crucial issue there and I
don't know exactly what to make of it
and my approach at the moment as I said
is to approach this as rationally as I
possibly can and I hope I know a hell of
a lot more about what I'm doing by the
time I get to that particular question
and I do have the beginnings of ways to
answer that but I'm not going to answer
that at all right now because it's so
bloody complicated that would just burn
me to a frazzle and I'm already mostly
bird to a frazzle after that lecture so
I couldn't attempt to even start to
sketch it out I don't know I mean part
of it is to be just rational about it
just to be rational about it there is
something about the idea that continual
death and rebirth is a necessary
precondition to proper human adaptation
every time you learn something new
that's important part of the stupid old
you has to die and sometimes that can be
an awful lot of you and in fact it can
be so much of you sometimes that you
just die right you just can't handle it
and so there is there is a real idea
that you have to identify with the part
of yourself that transcends your current
personality that can constantly die and
be reborn now then I could say well that
means that all of this is psychological
and symbolic and that's the simplest
answer but I'm not satisfied with that
answer even though I think it's coherent
and complete because the world is a very
weird place and there are things about
it that we don't understand so so I
can't go I can't go any farther than
that at the moment so yeah hi dr.
Peterson
I just recently watched one of your
videos of you debating with
transgendered protesters at UofT free
speech rally in October and one of the
protesters one of the comments one of
the protesters said to you which isn't
particularly very like very chilling was
why do you have the right to determine
whether an individual is worthy of you
using their pronouns the scary thing to
me is how common this type of view
is among radical left-wing protesters on
University campuses who feel they have
the right to tell other people what they
can think what words they can use and
what speakers they can or cannot listen
to the even scarier part is that our
government is creating legislations to
back up their ADL ideologies which is
evident through Bill c16 m103 and bill
89 so my question is what do you think
the endgame is in all this because it
seems every year or we're in the process
of finding that out you know and I'm
sorry I'm sorry okay we're in the
process of finding that out I don't I
mean I think the endgame that underlies
all of that in my estimation is best
summed up by Jacques Derrida's
Christiane her criticism of Western
civilization its FAL logo centric now
we've already talked about what the
logos means right and so and and so for
for Derrida that was a sign of its utter
what would you call it
utter despit the dot early despicable
dominant nature of Western culture well
that that's what animates the post
modernists now they may not know that
because an indie ology gets fragmented
across its adherents and then it only
acts as the coherent ideology with all
those adherents come together in a mob
and then you see the animating spirit so
I said I think that there's a battle
going on that's a battle exactly at the
level that Derrida described and that's
a theological battle with a
philosophical with it with the
philosophical implications and out of
those philosophical implications come
political implications but it's not
primarily political and it's not
primarily philosophical it's deeper than
that and the post modernists are out
there their criticism was designed to be
fundamental and it also emerged out of
Marxism and let's not forget that the
Marxist criticism was not only
fundamental but just about resulted in
the nuclear annihilation of the
girl these are not trivial issues and
we're back in the same insane boat and
so what do I think should be done about
that well I thought about that way
before any of this happened and I think
that what we should do about it is we
should tell the truth because there
isn't anything more powerful than that
and that's the right theological answer
because the spoken truth brings good
into being well that's the FAL logo
centric idea and I'm trying to revisit
that to explain to people what it means
and to see if they think that's a good
idea I mean that's what we have to
figure out is it is that an idea worth
adhering to or not the alternative is
the c4 the post modernists the world is
that landscape of pyramids that I
described but there's no transcendent
vision that's over above that and all of
those pyramids are equally valid and
it's a war of everyone against everyone
it's like it's like the nightmare of
Hobbes Thomas Hobbes except that it's
not individuals it's groups and
everyone's that group you're a group
you're whatever your group is it's like
that's death as far as I'm concerned
it's it's it's utterly reprehensible and
and we better sort it out because if we
don't sort it out we are bloody well
going to pay for it
so thank you
[Applause]
hey how's it going I just want to say
thank you for doing all this and I
really appreciate that's Bob and Doug
McKenzie right yeah hey how's it going
yeah I'm glad you caught that yeah yeah
yeah well I did a Facebook poll yeah
people who are familiar with where your
work and a question kind of rose to the
top like just right out of their lives
spectacular and what it was you didn't
really touch it here but you touched it
a bit in your lectures it was about
integrating the shadow yep and one of
the main questions was how does one go
about that especially in the modern
world you know like really sheltered
from anything resembling that kind of
concept you know we don't engage like
the unknown we don't come into
life-or-death situations most of us must
rework is like an ambulance you know
well that's one thing you can do with
that is one thing you can do you know
well yeah you can search out experiences
that put you there that's that's that's
you know because well you can do that as
a volunteer for example I mean you can
one of the things I saw once within
Montreal I was in this outdoor mall in
Montreal on st. Hubert and saw this
great big 17 year old kid you know and
he had a mohawk and he was dressed in
leather and he with you know studs and
like he was he was he was doing the
water and Barbarian thing and he had it
really down and you know he's standing
on the corner with two pink shopping
bags hey
because look into him and I thought you
know if someone offered him the ID the
opportunity to drop those goddamn
sleeping bags or shopping bags and go
fight with Isis he'd be there in a
second yeah right because what the hell
is some monster like that doing standing
on the corner of st. Hubert Alden - pink
shopping bags so I mean so some of it is
that it you need you need to find out
where you can push where you could you
can need to find out that edge that you
can push yourself against the tree it's
going to be different for different
people
but there's there's that's the call to
adventure and heroism and there are life
and death situations everywhere around
you if you want to involve yourself in
them you know
an idiot sometimes that might be like to
put yourself together to the degree that
you can say physically or spiritually or
intellectually it could be an
intellectual battle it could be a moral
battle like the frontier is everywhere
the frontier is just the edge between
what you know and what you don't know
you want to put yourself on that damn
edge and then make yourself into
something and and you can retreat into
comfort in the modern world and I think
that is a problem you know I mean I've
noticed that it's one of the pathologies
of wealth I would say because one of the
problems with being relatively wealthy
if you're a parent is that you cannot
provide your children with necessity and
that's a big problem because they need
necessity to call them into being and
you know if you don't have a lot of
material resources and your children ask
you for something you can say no because
no is the answer it's like no you can't
do that but if you can say yes then it's
really hard to say no because then
you're just arbitrary well I don't know
it's like Kierkegaard said you know
there will come a time when we have so
much security and comfort that what
we'll want more than anything else is
part deprivation and challenge and I
think I think that's particularly what
young men want now I think that that's
partly because young women they're stuck
with that anyways because they have to
it's it's it's the necessity of living
in the world and the responsibility of
infant care in particular like that
occupies them men have to do it
voluntarily women now - because of the
birth control pill but you know that's
what thirty years ago we hardly have to
talk about that at all yes so then you
have so much
[Applause]
[Music]
hi dr. Peterson so I'm actually a Coptic
Orthodox and Egyptian so I found you're
talking a incredibly interesting I've
also taken a deep interest in the old
church fathers and as if you're talking
about Iraqis I arkin back to st.
Athanasius when the idea feels is that
you brought up last time that God became
man so that man can become like God so I
was thinking about the systems of the
hierarchies and is that an example of at
the top of the pyramid the hierarchy
sort of gets inverted or descends to the
bottom and brings it up and to the top
and that sort of an attraction to of
Christianity that sort of made
Christianity such a powerful idea what
are your thoughts on that
oh well it's certainly one of the I mean
it's certainly one of the things that we
not just Christianity a powerful idea
because one of the things that happened
this was called the democratization of
Osiris if I remember correctly and like
what happened see if I can answer this
question using this approach for sex is
that going to work
hmm I don't know if I can answer that
question that way the the part of the
attraction of Christianity but this was
something that emerged across time was
the notion that even if you were in a
lowly position that there was something
about you that was akin to the divine
and now you might say well that's just
wish fulfillment that's what Freud would
say that's what Marx would say right the
opiate of the masses tweeted yesterday
something I thought was pretty funny
which was that like religion was the
opiate of the masses but that Marxism
was the methamphetamine of the max of
the masses so so so I think the
attraction was that it it it allowed
people to recognize their intrinsic
dignity and one of the things I've been
thinking about is the juxtaposition
between Genesis 1 and Genesis 2 because
what I was in Genesis 2 is that human
beings collapse and fall right and then
were these fallen creatures that no evil
but in the beginning in Genesis 1 it's
really an optimistic story because it
says well we're the sorts of creatures
that partake in the calling forth of
being from chaos and then that's in our
essential nature and to some degree if
you juxtapose both of those it's as if
that's the entire biblical story rammed
together in the first two chapters which
is partly why we're taking so long to
get through this by the way is that to
return to Genesis 1 is the antidote to
Genesis 2 it's like to continue to act
out the doctrine that you're made in
God's image and that means that you're
you're capable of speaking good being
into existence through truth and that
that's also the antidote to the fall
which i think is actually the
fundamental narrative message of the
entire biblical structure and I also
think of Western civilization for that
matter so there's a nobility and this is
also I think Nietzsche was fundamentally
wrong in his criticism with Christianity
because he thought about it and slaves
morality
you know the Vengeance of the bottom
against the talk that's more historical
than theological
so it gives dignity it illuminates the
dignity of the human being and and
requires responsibility so it's not just
wish fulfillment it's not Freudian wish
fulfillment the Freudian theory which I
thought about a lot is not tenable in my
estimation it also doesn't account for
the existence of hell because if it's
only wish fulfillment why bother with
hell it means a lot more if you're
really going to just fulfill a wish it's
like everybody gets to go to heaven no
matter what they do you don't have hell
which was of course something absolutely
terrifying to medieval Christians and
then to plenty of people now for that
matter so it's the nobility it's the
idea of the nobility that I thinks
deeply attractive to people and that's
all there is I mean what you have to
fight against your worm-like fragile
mortal existence is the possibility of
transcending that with nobility of
speech and Act that's what you have and
who can hear that without feeling
ennoble by that now you might say well
you might shudder and say well I don't I
can't bear the responsibility it's like
well fair enough man you know I mean
that that's a reasonable criticism but
the consequence of not bearing the
responsibility is that's hell really so
thank you
[Applause]
and thank you very much beautiful um I
don't know feel familiar with the words
of nasan Talib I'm reasonably familiar
with them so I think it's sad to say
that he has he talked about the idea
that people and especially modern people
have a failure to recognize the unknown
unknowns yeah such yes right that's a
good way of thinking about it can you
move the mic up a bit so that people can
hear you a little better thanks Gary yes
um well I was wondering do you think
that that failure might might be in some
way related to the way that modern
people fail to relate to the idea of God
so in the sense that your people can't
really grapple with the notion of God I
think as much as you can give a rational
argument or you can't feel God in the
way that perhaps a more religious person
or more an older person might have felt
God do you think that that inability to
recognize the unknown unknowns might
play into that yeah well they're okay so
that seems to be related to this idea of
the absence of necessity that's
something like that is that no because I
think that I think that what you're
you're making a claim maybe tell me if
I've got it wrong that if you're
sheltered too much then it also it also
separates you from anything that's
divine I guess that might be right
because there's not enough intensity of
the experience and something like that
is that is that part of the is that part
of the issue it might be more related to
the idea of like realizing the absolute
infinite root of what you don't know
like the like the mysterium tremendum
that that kind of you know if you
believe that through statistical
analysis you can get everything under
control and you genuinely believe that
at some point you'll get it or wonder
you know yeah okay well so okay so so
well that's also I think part of the
danger of rationality that the Catholics
have been implicitly warning again
forever is that rather rational mind
tends to fall in love with its own
productions and then to worship them as
absolutes which is I think what Melville
was trying to represent by his satanic
figure in Paradise Lost I think about as
like a precursor a prophetic precursor
to the emergence of totalitarian states
in the modern world and so yeah I think
that you can believe that what you know
is sufficient to banish permanently what
you don't know and I do think that that
does paradoxically although you think
that that would make you secure it also
does destroy your relationship with with
with with with the spirit that might
help you deal with what it is that you
really don't know with the unknown
unknowns so yeah I mean we don't know to
what degree extreme experience is
necessary to bring forth extreme
experience right what do you have to be
through before you encounter a religious
revelation well people might say well
you can't because there's no such thing
it's like well don't be so sure about
that
I mean people have reported them to row
history but they don't generally occur
when your that's my favorite tropen
you're eating cheesie's and playing you
know and playing Mario Brothers right so
yeah so that's the best I can do with
that engine yes yeah
this has to be the last question all
right I'll make it quick
yeah earlier when you talked about
criminality and creativity trends in
that in men peaking at 14 it reminded me
of something you said I think it was Joe
Rogan talking about sjw's and kind of
and how they create their own chaos
talking about how adolescents have this
drive to change the world and I was
wondering if if those three the
criminality creativity drive to change
the world are linked and if so if they
manifest differently in men and women
and if they kind of come from the same
era well I think they are linked but I'm
going to concentrate more on the net
second part of your question so I'm
going to ask you two guys some think
about something so I talked to a friend
of mine the other day he's a very very
smart guy and we've been talking about
while all the sorts of things that we've
been talking about tonight for a long
time and we were talking about the
relatively relative evolutionary roles
of men and women this is speculative
obviously and and because our research
did indicate it's tentative research so
far that that the the SGS SJW sort of
equality above all else
philosophy is more prevalent among women
well it's predicted by the personality
factors that are more common among women
so agreeable this and high negative
emotion primarily agreeableness but in
addition it's also predicted by being
female and that's interesting because in
most of the personality research that
I've done and as far as I know in the
literature at you know in more broadly
speaking most of the time you can get
rid of the attitudinal differences
between men and women or at least reduce
them by controlling for personality so
if you take a feminine man and a
masculine woman then you know that the
polls reverse but that didn't seem to be
the case with political correctness and
so I've been thinking about that a lot
because well men are bailing out of the
humanities like mad and pretty much out
of the universities except for stem the
women are moving in like mad and they're
also moving into the political sphere
like math and this is new right we've
never had this happen before and we do
know no do not know what the
significance of it is it's only 50 years
old and so we were thinking about this
and so I don't know what you think about
this proposition
but imagine that that historically
speaking it's something like women were
responsible for distribution and men
were responsible for production
something like that and maybe maybe
that's only the case really in the tight
confines of the immediate family but
that doesn't matter because that's most
of the evolutionary landscape for human
beings anyways what the women does it
did was make sure that everybody got
enough okay and that seems to me to be
one of the things that's driving at
least in part the SJW demand for for
equity and equality it's like let's make
sure everybody has enough it's like both
look fair enough you know I mean you
can't you can't argue with that
but there's there's an antipathy between
that and the the reality of differential
productivity you know because people
really do differ in their productivity
so all right so to answer your question
fully I do think that the rebellious
tendency of adolescence is associated
both with that criminality spike
especially among men and with creativity
yes I think that the SJW phenomena is
different and I think it is associated
at least in part with the rise of women
to political power and and we don't know
what women are life when they have
political power because they've never
had it I mean there's been queens
obviously and that sort of thing just
being female authority figures and
females have wielded far more power
historically than feminists generally
like to admit but this is a different
thing and we don't know what a truly
female political philosophy would be
like but it might be especially if it's
not been well examined and it isn't very
sophisticated conceptually it could
easily be well let's make sure things
are distributed equally well yeah but
sorry that's that's just not going to do
you fly do you think in terms of the
rest of this JW's and you talked about
last lecture as well creating chaos when
there is none otherwise it'd be static
do you think there would be any validity
in saying that in a country like Canada
were pretty gender equal is there any
merit to thinking sjw's are trying to
create chaos even when they're arguably
is none on the mass level obviously
there's still problems why would they do
that otherwise it would be static and
that well doesn't if it wouldn't for
them so I read this
I read this quote once and I don't
remember who who said it it might have
been Robert Heinlein for crying out loud
science fiction author that springs to
mind but a problem it probably wasn't
and his the proposition was that men
tested ideas and that women tested men
and I kind of like that there's
something about that you know and now it
obviously it's an over generalization
but we also don't know to what degree
women test men Cheerilee through
provocation it's a lot because like if
you want to test someone you don't have
a like little conversation with them
like you poke the hell out of them and
you say okay like I'm going to let go
after you and see where your weak spots
are and it seems to me that this it
seems to me that in this constant
protest and use of shame and all of that
that goes along with this with this sort
of radical movement towards
egalitarianism that there's a tremendous
amount of provocation and god I'm going
to say this too even though I shouldn't
but it but we mean how I don't believe
this but I'm trying trying to figure it
out
you know I thought it was absolutely
comical when Fifty Shades of Grey came
out a not just I just thought that was
just so insanely comical that at the
same time there's this massive political
demand for like radical equality and and
and say with regards to sexual behavior
and the fastest-selling novel the world
had ever seen was S&amp;M domination right
it's like oh well we know where the
unconscious is going with that one don't
leave and and sometimes I think like
because one of the things that I've
really tried to puzzle out and it's not
like I believe this right I'm just
telling you what I wear the edges of my
thinking of being going is that you have
this crazy alliance between the
feminists and the radical Islamist that
I just do not get it's like the
feminists it's like why they aren't
protesting non-stop about Saudi Arabia
is just completely beyond me
like I do not understand it in the least
and I wonder - I just wonder bloody well
is this is the Freudian means that is
there an attraction you know the is
there an attraction that's emerging
among the female radicals for that
totalitarian male dominance that they've
chased out of the West and I mean that's
a hell of a thing to think but I
after all I am psychoanalytically minded
and I do think things like that because
like I just can see no rational reason
for it the only other rational reason is
that well the West needs to fall and so
the enemy of my enemy is our yeah it's a
guy exactly now what is it I thought
that wrong with the enemy of enemy is my
friends yes exactly
so elements tend to vote liberal as well
yes well so that that could be the case
but I am NOT going to shake my
suspicions about this unconscious
balancing because as the demand for
egalitarianism and the eradication of
masculinity accelerates there's going to
be a longing in the unconscious for the
precise opposite for the problem of that
right the more you want you scream for
equality the more your unconscious is
going to admire dominance and so well
that's that's that's well that's how you
think if your cycle analytically minded
and you know I'm a great admirer of
Freud he knew a hell of a lot more than
people like to think and and so which is
partly why everyone still hates him even
though it's late a hundred years since
he's you know really really being around
so all right we should stop
hello everyone so hopefully we're going
to get past Genesis 1 today that's the
theory so I finished my new book
yesterday yes that's that's taken about
three years of writing it's quite a long
time to write something so yeah I'm it's
done except for the mopping up you know
copy editing and that sort of thing so
hopefully it's as good as I can make it
I don't know that's any good but it's as
good as I can make it anyways alright so
this is the stories that I'm going to
tell you tonight I've been thinking
about well like the ones last week for
that matter for a very long period of
time but I think these even longer and
one of the things that I just do not
understand I cannot fathom this I cannot
understand how there can be so much
information in such tiny little stories
especially the story of Cain and Abel
that story just every time I read it it
just flattens me because it it's only
like a paragraph long there's just
nothing to it you know and I think about
it I think about it and I think about it
I think about it every time I think
about it another layer comes out from
underneath and then another layer comes
out from underneath it and I can't
figure that out like you know the
rational approach that I've been
describing to you is predicated on the
idea that these stories have somehow
encapsulated wisdom that we generated
interpersonally and behaviorally in that
an image over very vast stretches of
time and then condensed it into very
very dense articulated words that are
then further refined by the act of being
remembered and transmitted and
remembered and transmitted and
remembered and transmitted over vast
stretches of time and that's a pretty
good argument I'm willing to
I'm willing to go with it but it still
never ceases to amaze me how much
information such tiny little passages
can can contain so we'll take that apart
today and I think it's especially true
with the story of Cain and Abel because
it works on the individual level and it
works on the familial level and it works
on the political level and it works at
the level of warfare and it works at the
level of economics and it's that's a lot
for a little tiny one paragraph story to
cover man now you know you could object
well with these stories you never know
what you're reading into it and what's
in the story right that's part of let's
call it the postmodern dilemma and fair
enough and there's really no answer to
that any more than there is an answer to
how do you know your interpretation of
the world is well let's not say correct
but sufficient there's some answer to
that it's sufficient in if you can act
it out in the world and other people
don't object too much and you don't die
and nature doesn't take a bite out of
you any more often than necessary you
know those are the constraints within
which we live so it you have some way of
determining whether your interpretation
is at least functionally successful and
that's and that's not trivial and I
guess you can say the same thing to the
interpretations that might be laid out
on these stories and at the moment
that's probably good enough hopefully
you find the interpretations
functionally significant at multiple
levels and I also think the chance of
managing that by chance is very very
small you know to be able to pull off an
interpretation of the story that works
at multiple levels simultaneously you
think with each level that it applies
the chances that you've stumbled across
something by chance have to be
decreasing right there's a technical
term for that in psychology it's called
something like multi method multi trait
method of determining whether or not
something is accurate and the idea is
the more ways that you can measure it
and get the same result the more
confident you can be that you're not
just deluding yourself with your a
priori hypothesis you know that there's
actually something
out there so I guess that's another part
of this method is that and it's also a
method that I use in my in my speaking I
think I don't try to tell people
anything that isn't personally relevant
you know because you should know why you
are being taught something right you
should know what the fact is good for
and it should be good for you personally
at least in some sense and then if you
act it out in the world it should be
good for your family and maybe should
have some significance for the broader
community and I think that's what
meaning means and I don't really see the
utility in being taught things that
aren't meaningful facts that aren't
meaningful because there's an infinite
number of fact and there's no way you're
going to remember all of them they have
to be they have to have the aspect of
tools essentially something like that
because we are tool using creatures well
these these stories have that aspect is
as far as I can tell there's nothing
there's no doubt about that
so here's the stories in Genesis two
very famous stories obviously virtually
everybody who's even vaguely versed in
Western roughly speaking Western Western
culture knows these stories and that's
something that's interesting too that
stories can be so foundational that
everybody shares them I mean you can say
the same thing about a fairly large
handful of fairy tales as well or you
could at least until recently but the
fact that stories are foundational I
think also means that they have to be
given out kind of well even if you don't
give them any respect you have to at
least treat them as remarkable
curiosities so why those stories and why
did they stick around and why does
everybody know them and it's not
self-evident by any stretch of the
imagination and you can use explanations
can use the Freudian explanation Freud
sort of thought that the judeo-christian
was predicated on the idea that the
figure of the Father the familial father
was expanded up into cosmic dimensions
so that mankind existed in the same
relationship to the cosmic father let's
say that an infant or a small child
existed in relationship to his or her
own father and that's a reasonable
critique I would say to some degree but
it does
and this was purposeful it does imply
more than implied for its case that
people who adopt religious belief that
has a personified figure as at its apex
are essentially acting out the role of
dependent children and you know I
thought about that critique for a long
time and believe me that's been a
powerful critique one of the best books
I've ever read called the denial of
death by Ernest Becker I think took that
line of argumentation it developed it as
well as any any book I've ever seen
argue it Necker tried to bring closure
to Freudian psychoanalysis on religion
he did a pretty wicked job of it like I
think the book is seriously flawed and
wrong but it's really a great book like
some books are well some books are wrong
in really good ways right they make a
powerful powerful argument they really
take it to its extreme
I think Becker missed the point and he
missed it in the same way that Freud
missed Jung's point and Becker who wrote
this book on the psychology the
psychoanalysis of religion never
referred to Jung except very briefly in
the introduction and I think that was a
major mistake but Becker took the
argument that the hypothesis of God is
nothing but an attempt by human beings
to recreate quasi infantile state of
dependency and to be able to rely on an
all-knowing father and to thereby
recover the comfort perhaps that we
experienced when we were young and had a
hypothetically all-knowing father for
those of us who are lucky to have
someone who rig vaguely resembled that
but the more I thought about that the
more that struck me is quite implausible
across time Charles Taylor I think it
was Charles Taylor wrote an interesting
book called the I think it was called
the origins of the modern self he's a
McGill philosopher and I wouldn't
necessarily call him a friend of classic
religion but it doesn't matter he made a
very interesting point about
Christianity in particular he said if
you're going to invent a religion that
offered you nothing but
infantile comfort why in the world would
you bother with conceptualizing hell
that just seems like an unnecessary
detail to add to the whole story right
if it's it's all about comfort why would
you hypothesize that the consequence of
of a serious error was eternal torment
that doesn't really sound very isn't the
sort of thing that that is likely to
make you feel comfortable James Joyce
when he wrote about that said he had
terrible nightmares when he was a child
because of the Hellfire sermons that
Jesuits used to spout spew forth let's
say and he wrote down what he remembered
of them and they were pretty
hair-raising I think in James Joyce's
book I think it was portrait of the
artist of a young man man he talked
about the Jesuits telling them and
telling him that hell was a like a
prison with walls that were seven miles
thick that was always in darkness and
consumed by fire and that the people who
were trapped there were continually
burnt by this dark fire that gave new
light which also simultaneously
rejuvenated their flesh so that it could
be burnt off eternally in case you were
wondering how it was going to be burnt
off eternally that's apparently the
process it's not easy for me to see that
as an infantile wish-fulfillment
I'm afraid you know you could well you
could be a cynic about it and Elaine
Tasos who wrote a book on the devil was
cynical about it in this manner she
thought that the Christians so to speak
invented hell as a place to put their
enemies and you know yeah fair enough
but no that's not accurate
really well although it's convenient to
have a place to put your enemies Charles
Taylor did point out for example that
the modern terror of loss of self let's
say the existential loss of self and
loss of meaning was perhaps roughly
paralleled by the medieval terror of
Hell
you know in terms of the existential
intensity and so it wasn't hell wasn't
merely a place where those people that
you didn't care for would end up it was
the place where you were going to go if
you didn't walk the line properly and so
I don't think Freud's Freud's critique
really holds water in the final analysis
and then Marx's critique of course was
that religion was the opiate of the
masses and he made an
argument that was similar to Freud's
although somewhat earlier and made the
based upon the presupposition that
religious beliefs were stories told to
the gullible masses in order to keep
them pacified and happy well their
corporate overlords for lack of a better
purpose continue to exploit them and and
and weaken them and you know I find that
I find the critique of human
institutions as driven entirely by power
very let's say questionable to to say
the least and of course every human
institution is corrupted by corrupted is
corrupt by for one reason or another and
it's also corrupt specifically by such
things as deception and arrogance and
the demand for unearned power and the
same thing of course can be applied to
religious systems but that doesn't mean
that they are in some special way
characteristic of those faults and maybe
you think they are and you know maybe
you can make a case for but it's not
prime FS I think that's how you say that
evident that that is that also is a
particularly useful criticism I don't
buy it
I think there's I think that's far too
cynical I think that the people who
wrote these stories first of all what
are you going to do you can oh really
you're going to run a bloody conspiracy
for three thousand years successfully
it's like good luck with that can't run
a conspiracy for fifteen minutes without
somebody ratting you out you know it's
it's impossible so whatever is that the
basis of the construction not only of
these stories but of the dogmatic
structures that emerged from them I
think that it's a terrible mistake to
reduce them to unit dimensional
explanations in fact I generally think
that reducing any complex human behavior
to uni dimensional explanation is often
the sign of a seriously limited thinker
you know I say that with some caution
because Freud did do that with religion
at least to some degree and Freud was a
serious thinker and Marx I suppose was a
serious thinker - even though well
yeah is he someone you just if you have
any sense marks just leaves you
speechless so so anyway so that's all to
say that I don't think there's any
simple explanation for how these stories
have the power that they have I really
don't I don't think you can reduce it to
political conspiracy that's for sure I
don't think you could reduce it to
psychological infantilism I think you
can make a case like I have that they
are repositories of the collective
wisdom of the human race I had an
interesting letter this week from
someone I get a lot of interesting
letters I think I'm going to make an
archive out of them and put them on the
web at some point with people's
permission obviously and he said that
he'd been following my lectures and
noted that I had been making what you
might describe as a quasi biological or
evolutionary case for for the emergence
of the information that the stories
contained and he said well how do you
know that someone from a different
religious tradition or speaking of a
different religious tradition couldn't
do exactly the same thing and I thought
well first of all to some degree they
could because there is overlap like I've
talked to you a little bit about Taoist
for example in the Taoist view of being
as you know the eternal balance between
chaos and order one thing I didn't tell
you I don't think about that I don't
know if you know this but there's a
neuropsychologist named L Conan Goldberg
who is a student of Alexander Luria and
Luria was I think the greatest
neuropsychologist of the 20th century he
was a Russian and he was one of the
first people to really determine in
large part the function of the frontal
cortex which was quite a mystery for a
very long period of time and Goldberg
you know you know how we have two
hemispheres right they have a left
hemisphere and the right hemisphere and
people often think of the left for
right-handed people right-handed males
more particularly because women are more
neurologically diffuse it's one of the
things that makes them more robust to
head injury for example and maybe men
are less diffuse and somewhat more
specialized which makes them a bit more
specialized but a little more subject to
damage anyways we have to him
is left in the right and no one exactly
knows why and we know that the house
quasi-independent consciousness is
because if you divide the corpus
callosum that that unites them which was
done to in cases of intractable epilepsy
for example that each hemisphere is
capable of developing its own
consciousness to some degree the right
generally nonverbal and the left verbal
and so there has been this idea that the
left is a verbal Hemisphere and the
right is a nonverbal hemisphere but that
can't be right because of course animals
don't talk and they have a bifurcated
hemisphere so if it's right it's not
causally right now goldberg hypothesized
instead that the hemispheres were were
specialized for routinization and non
routinization or for novelty and
familiarity or for chaos and order and
so that's pretty damn cool when i ran
across that i also thought about that as
a as a signal of what would you call it
multi method multi trait construct
validation because i'd never thought of
the hemispheres as operating that way
and goldberg came up with this in a
historical pathway that was entirely
independent from any mythologically
inspired thinking completely independent
fact it was motivated more by
materialist russian neuro psychology
which was materialist for political
reasons and also for scientific reasons
but the idea is that we have one
hemisphere that reacts very rapidly to
things we don't know and it's more
imaginative and diffuse in it and it's
associated more with negative emotion
because negative emotion is what you
should feel immediately when you
encounter something you don't understand
because it's a form of thinking right
negative emotion it's like I'm somewhere
where things aren't with what they
should be right hemisphere does that
generates images very rapidly to help
you figure out what might be there and
then the left hemisphere takes that and
develops it into something that's more
articulated and and algorithmic and
fully understood and so then there's
this dynamic balance between the right
and the left hemisphere where the left
tries to impose order on the world
that's Ramachandran who's a neurologist
in in california very famous neuro neuro
neurologist who also developed a theory
like goldberg who said that the left
hemisphere
or imposes routinized order on the world
and the right hemisphere generates
novelty and and and reacts the novelty
and generates novel hypotheses and he
thought and there is some good evidence
for this that's what's happening during
the dream is that information is moved
from the right hemisphere to the left
hemisphere in small doses basically so
that the novel revelations of the right
hemisphere don't demolish the
algorithmic structures that the left
hemisphere has so carefully put together
so and I like that theory too because it
also does help justify the hypothesis
that I'd be laying out for you which is
that you know there's part of us that
extends ourselves out into the world in
tries to understand what we don't know
and that that part extends itself out
with behavior and also with emotion and
also with image and then maybe with
poetry and then maybe with storytelling
and then as that develops then we
develop more and more articulated
representations of that emergent
knowledge and so you can map that quite
nicely onto the neurologists and the
neuropsychologist presumption about what
constitutes the reason for the
hemispheric differentiation but the
other thing that's so cool about the
hemispheric differentiation argument as
far as I'm concerned and this is really
this is worth thinking about man because
it's a real it's a real is a word that
Ned Ned Flanders uses for that noggin
scratcher I think it's something like
that anyways you know we do make the
assumption that what it is that we are
biologically adapted to is reality right
it's actually an axiomatic definition if
you're a Darwinian because nature is
what selects by definition that's what
nature is its what selects and if the
nature that selects has forced upon you
a dual hemispheric structure because
half of you has to deal with the chaos
and have to have a view has to deal with
order then you can make a pretty damn
strong inferential case that the world
is made out of chaos and order and
that's really something to that's really
something to think about man you know so
you can think about that for a while if
you want so
anyways for whatever reason there is a
lot to packed into these stories and so
let's investigate a couple more of them
we'll start with this story but of Adam
and Eve now you may remember that the
Bible is a series of books Bible
actually means something akin to library
and these books were written by all
sorts of different people and groups of
people and groups of editors and groups
of people who edited over and over
across very very large periods of time
so they're altered by no one and many at
the same time if there was a tradition
for a long time that the earliest books
were written by Moses but that that's
probably not technically correct even
though it might be dramatically correct
let's say or correct in the way that a
fairy tale is correct and I'm not trying
to put down fairy tales by saying that
but there's a number of authors and the
way the authors have been identified
tentatively is by certain stylistic
commonalities across the different
stories different uses of words like the
words for God different poetic styles
different topics and so forth and people
have been working for probably 200 years
roughly that to try to sort out who
wrote what and how that was all cobbled
together but it doesn't really matter
for our purposes what matters is that
it's an aggregation of collected
narrative traditions and maybe you could
say it's an aggregation of collective
narrative wisdom we don't have to go
that far but we can at least say it's
aggregated narrative traditions and that
there was some reason that those
traditions and not others were kept and
that there was some reasons complex
though they may have been why they were
sequenced in the order that they were
sequenced because one of the things
that's really remarkable about the Bible
as an as a document is that it actually
has a plot and that's really something I
mean it's it's sprawling and it goes
many places but the fact that
something's being cobbled together over
several thousand years maybe four
thousand years maybe longer than that if
you include the oral traditions that
preceded it and God knows how old those
are but that collective imagination part
of the human collective imagination has
cobbled together a library with a plot
and like I see the Bible as an attempt a
collective attempt by him
you solve the deepest problems that we
have and I think those problems are the
problems of primarily that the problem
of self-consciousness the fact that not
only do we are immortal and that we die
but that we know it and that's the
unique that's the unique predicament of
human beings and it makes all the
difference and I think that's laid out
in Adam and Eve in the story of Adam and
Eve I think the reason that that makes
us unique and is laid out in that story
and interestingly and I really realized
this only after I was doing last three
lectures so the Bible presents a
cataclysm of okay a Cataclysm at the
beginning of the top of time which is
the emergence of self-consciousness and
human beings which puts a risk into the
structure of being that's the right way
to think about it and that's really
given cosmic significance now you can
dispense with out and say well nothing
that happens to human beings that have
caused me significance because we're
these short-lived you know mold like
entities that are like cancers on this
tiny little planet that's rotating out
in the middle of nowhere on the edge of
some unknown galaxy in the middle of
infinite space and nothing that happens
to us matters and it's fine you like you
can walk down that road if you want I
wouldn't recommend it I mean and that's
part of the reason I think that for all
intents and purposes it's untrue you
know it isn't there it isn't a road you
can walk down and live well in fact I
think if you really walk down that road
and you really take it seriously you end
up not living at all
so it's certainly very reminiscent I
mean I've talked to lots of people who
are suicidal and seriously suicidal and
you know the kind of conclusions that
they draw both the utility of life prior
to wishing for its cessation are very
much like the kind of conclusions that
you draw if you walk down that
particular line of reasoning long enough
if you're interested in that you could
read Tolstoy his confessions Leo Tolstoy
his confession it's a very short book
it's a it's a killer man it's it's a
powerful book very very short and
Tolstoy describes his obsession with
suicide when he was at the height of his
fame most well-known author in the world
you know huge family international fame
wealth beyond anyone's imagining at that
time influential admired
everything that you could possibly
imagine that everyone could have and for
years he was afraid to go out into his
barn with a rope or a gun because he
thought he'd either hang himself or
shoot himself and he did get out of that
he and he describes why that happened
and where he went when that happened so
if you're interested in that that's a
very good book but so the biblical
stories and starting with Adam and Eve
they present a different story they
present the emergence of
self-consciousness in human beings as
cosmically cataclysmic event and you
could say well what do we have to do
with the cosmos and the answer to that
is it depends on what you think
consciousness has to do with the cosmos
and perhaps that's nothing and perhaps
it's everything I'm going to go with
everything because that's how it looks
to me now of course anyone who wishes to
is welcome to disagree but if you
believe that consciousness is a force of
cosmic significance which Britt which
which being itself is dependent on in
any real sense at least in any
experience will sense that it's that
it's not unreasonable to assume that
radical restructurings of consciousness
can worthily be granted some kind of
cosmic or metaphysical significance and
even if it's not true from outside the
human perspective whatever that might be
it's bloody well true from within the
human perspective that's for sure and so
that's the that's the initial event in
some sense after the creation is the
cataclysmic fall and then the entire
rest of the Bible is an attempt to
figure out what the hell to do about
that and everything in it is is and so
you could say for example in the
earliest in the Old Testament stories
what seems to happen is that the State
of Israel is is founded and it rises and
falls and rises and falls and so there's
this experimentation for centuries
millennia even with the idea that the
way that you protect yourself against
the tragic consequences of self
consciousness is by organizing yourself
into a state but then what happens is
the state itself begins to reveal its
pathologies and as those pathologies
mount the state becomes an unstable and
collapses and then it rises back up and
becomes unstable and collapses and then
it rises back up after it does this a
number of
this is primarily from Northrup prize
interpretations people start wondering
if there's not something wrong with the
idea that the state itself is this is
the is the pathway is the place of
redemption that there's something wrong
with that idea and so then I think on on
the heels of that comes the Christian
revolution with its hypothesis that it's
not the state that's that's the place of
salvation it's the individual psyche and
then there's there's a there's a an
ethic that goes along with that too
which is quite interesting so the ethic
of redemption after the state experiment
fails let's say is that it's it's the
it's within the individual that
redemption can be manifested let's say
and even in so far as the state is
concerned because the state's proper
functioning is dependent on the proper
functioning of the individual rather
than the reverse most fundamentally and
that the proper mode of individual being
that's redemptive is truth and truth is
the antidote to the suffering that's it
emerges with the fall of man in the
story of Adam and Eve and then that
relates back to the chapters that we've
already talked about because there's
this insistence in Genesis 1 that it's
the word in the form of truth that
generates order out of chaos but even
more importantly and this is something
like I said I most clearly realize just
doing these lectures for the last three
weeks is God continues to say as he
speaks order into being with truth that
the being he speaks into being is good
and so there's this insistence that the
being that spoke into being through
truth is good and so there's a hint
there so interesting is a hint there
right at the beginning of the story that
the the state of being that Adam and Eve
inhabited before they fell before they
became self consciousness conscious
insofar as they were made in the image
of God and acting out the truth that
that being itself was properly balanced
and it takes the entire Bible to
rediscover that which is a which is a
journey back to the beginning right and
that's a classic see
it's a classic mythological theme that
the wise person is the person who finds
what they lost in childhood and regains
it right so that's a I think that's a
Jewish idea that Zadok if I remember
correctly who is a messiah figure is the
person who finds what he lost in
childhood and regains it his idea of
this return to the beginning except that
the return is you don't fall backwards
into childhood and unconsciousness you
returned voluntarily to the state of
childhood
well awake and then determined to
participate through truth in the
manifestation of proper being now you
know I'm a psychologist and I've taught
personality theory for a very long time
and I know personality theory is that
profound personality theories pretty
well and I'm reasonably well versed in
philosophy although not as well-versed
as I should be but I can tell you in all
the things I've ever read or encountered
or thought about I have never once found
an idea that matches that in terms of
profundity but not only profundity also
in believability because the other thing
I see is a clinician and I think this is
very characteristic of clinical
experience and also very much described
explicitly by the great clinicians is
that what cures in therapy is truth
that's the curative now there's exposure
to the things you're afraid of and
avoiding as well but I would say that's
a form of enacted truth because if you
know there's something you should do by
your own set of rules and you're
avoiding it then you're enacting a lot
you know you're not telling one but
you're acting one out it's the same damn
thing so if I can get you to face what
it is that you're confronting that you
know you shouldn't be avoiding then
what's happening is that we're both
partaking in the process of attempting
you to act out your deepest truth and
what happens is that that improves
people's lives and it improves them
radically and the evidence the clinical
evidence to that is overwhelming we know
that if you expose people to the things
they're afraid of but that they're
avoiding they get better and you have to
do it carefully and cautiously and with
their own participation and all of that
but of all the things that clinicians
have established that's credible that's
number one and that's nested inside this
deeper realization that the clinical
experience is redemptive let's say
because it's designed to address
insofar as the people who are engaged in
the process are both telling each other
the truth and then you think well
obviously because if if you have some
problems and you come to talk to me
about them well first of all just by
coming to talk to me about them you've
admitted that they exist man that's a
pretty good start and second well if you
tell me about them then we know what
they are and then if we know what they
are we can maybe start to lay out some
solutions and then you can go act out
the solutions and see if they work but
if you don't admit they're there and you
won't tell me what they are and I don't
and I'm like posturing and acting
egotistically and taking the upper hand
and all of that in our discussions well
how the hell is that going to work you
know it might be comfortable moment to
moment while we stay encapsulated in our
delusion but it's not going to work so a
lot of that seems to think it through it
seems pretty self-evident and you know
Freud thought that repression was at the
heart of much mental suffering the
difference between repression and
deception is a matter of degree and
that's all its technical it's a
technical differentiation and Alfred
Adler who was one of Freud's greatest
associates would say and much
underappreciated I would say he thought
that people got into problems because
they started to act out a life lie
that's what he called it a life lie
that's worth looking up because I blur
although not as charismatic as Freud was
very practical and and and really
foreshadowed a lot of later developments
in cybernetics theory and of course Jung
believed that you could bypass
psychotherapy entirely by merely making
a proper moral effort in your own life
and Carl Rogers believed that it was
honest communication mediated through
dialogue that had redemptive
consequences and the behaviors believe
that you do a careful micro analysis of
the problems that are laid before you
and help introduce people to what
they're avoiding it's like all of those
things to me are just secular variations
of the notion that truth will set you
free essentially so so you know it's a
pretty powerful story and a it's not
that easy to dispense with and B the
other thing is you dispense with it at
your peril because what I have seen as
well is that the people that I've seen
who've been really hurt
have been hurt mostly by deceit and
that's all so we're thinking about that
you know you get walloped by life
there's no doubt about that absolutely
no doubt about that but I thought for a
long time that maybe maybe maybe people
can hang handle earthquakes and cancer
and even Gasparini but they can't handle
betrayal and they can't handle deception
they can't handle having the rug pulled
out from underneath and by people that
they love and trust that just does them
in you know it it makes the meal but it
does where it hurts that you know psycho
physiologically it damages them but more
than that it makes them cynical and
bitter and vicious and resentful and
then they also start to act all that out
in the world and that makes it worse so
so you know the story starts God uses
the spoken truth to create being that is
good and then the Cataclysm occurs and
then human beings spend until millenia
trying to sort out exactly what to do
about the fact that they've become self
conscious and you know by the way we
have right we are in fact self conscious
no other animal has that distinction
now you'll read that chimpanzees can for
example if you put lipstick on a
chimpanzee it's kind of a strange thing
to do yeah well I won't pursue that any
further but
but the chimp a chimpanzee will wipe off
the lipstick if you show it a mirror and
dolphins seem to be able to recognize
themselves in mirrors and there is so
there is the glimmerings of self
conscious recognition in other animals
but to put that in the same conceptual
category as human self-consciousness is
into my way of thinking it's it's well
it's uninformed to say the least but I
also think that it's motivated it's
motivated by a kind of anti humanistic
underlying and underlying motivation
because our self-consciousness is so
incredibly developed compared to that
that they're hardly in the same
conceptual universes it's like comparing
the the alarm cries of vervet monkeys
when they see a predator to the language
of human beings it's like yeah yeah
there's some similarities man there are
utter insanity nning but they're not
language and the self-consciousness of
animals is proto self-consciousness and
it's only they're a very small number of
animals and it's it's nothing like ours
they're not aware of the future like we
are they're not aware of their
boundaries in space and time and that's
the critical thing and most particularly
time human beings discovered time and
when we discovered time we discovered
the end of each of our being and that
made all the difference
and that's what the story of Adam and
Eve is about so Genesis one is derived
from the priestly source where God is
known as Elohim or L shall die and
there's God in the singular and there's
God's in the plural and I suppose that's
because it seems that if you analyze the
history of the development of
monotheistic ideas that monotheism
emerges out of a plurality of gods and
as I mentioned I think it's because the
gods represent fundamental forces at
minimum and those fundamental forces
have to be hierarchically organized for
with some with something absolute at the
top because otherwise they do nothing
but war like you have to organize your
values hierarchically or you stay
confused and that's true if you're an
individual and it's true of your estate
if you don't know what the next thing
you should do is then there's 50 things
you should do
and then how are you going to do any of
them you can't you have to prioritize
something has to be above something else
has to be arranged in a hierarchy for it
not to be chaotic and so there's some
principle at the top of the hierarchy
and maybe the organization of the gods
over time that's the battle of gods that
machiya le ADA talked about and if
you're interested in that you could read
a history of religious ideas which I
would really recommend it's a
three-volume book it's actually quite as
straightforward read as far as these
things go and elliot it does a very nice
job of describing how and even why
polytheism tends towards monotheism even
in polytheistic cultures there's a
strong tendency for the gods to organize
themselves in the hierarchy with one God
at the top in a monotheistic culture in
some in some sense all the other gods
just disappear across time and there's
nothing left at the top God but even in
a polytheistic society there's a
hierarchy of power among the gods the
first story is newer than the second one
so the story I'm going to tell you today
is actually older than the one I already
told you even though their order was
flipped by the redactor who's the
hypothetical person or persons who
edited these stories together we don't
know exactly why he or the committee or
what I suspect it was a single person
but who knows we don't know why the
stories were edited together in the
order that they were added together but
we could infer I mean they were edited
together in that order because the
editor thought they made sense that way
because that's what an editor does right
an editor tends to take diverse ideas
and then to organize them in some manner
that makes sense and part of the manner
that makes sense is that you can tell
them to people and the people stay
interested and you can tell them to
people and people remember them that's
that's one of the ways you can tell if
you've got an argument right because
it's communicable and understandable and
memorable and so he this person was
let's say motivated by intuition to
organize the stories in this particular
manner so the second the yahwist strand
contains the stories the classic stories
in the Pentateuch that's five books
Genesis Exodus Leviticus numbers and
Deuteronomy which we'll try to get
through perhaps in these twelve lectures
we'll see we'll see how that goes it's
strongly on through
perfect so the God in the August account
is for all intents and purposes a sort
of meta person and I dealt with that a
little bit last week because people tend
to you know think of that as
unsophisticated but when you think that
the mind that the the ground of
consciousness is the most complex thing
that we know of then it's not so
unsophisticated to assume that the most
complex thing that there might be is
like that or it's at least it's as good
as we can do with our imaginations and
so I don't think it's so it's so it's so
unsophisticated it's also the case and
this is practically speaking is that it
is not at all unreasonable to think of
God the Father as the spirit that arises
from the crowd that exists into the
future right and that's we talked about
that in relationship to the idea of
sacrifice at least a little bit more or
we're going to you make sacrifices in
the present so that the future is happy
with you the question is what is that
future that would be happy with you and
the answer to that is it's the spirit of
humanity that's that's who you're
negotiating with because you make the
assumption that if you forego impulsive
pleasure and get your medical degree
that when you're done in 10 years and
you're a physician humanity as such will
honor your sacrifice and commitment and
open the doors to you right so you're
treating the future as if it's a single
being and you're also treating it as if
it's a something like a compassionate
judge you're acting that out and maybe
we had to imagine God in that form
before we could understand once we
started to understand that there was a
future perhaps we had to imagine God in
that form in order to concretize
something that we could bargain with so
that we could figure out how to use
sacrifice to figure out how to guide
ourselves into the future because that
sacrifice is a contract with the future
but it's not a contract with any
particular person it's it's a contract
with the spirit of humanity as such it's
something like that and so when you
think about it that way that should make
you faint with amazement because that is
such a bloody amazing idea to come up
with that idea that you can bargain with
the future that is some idea man that's
that's like the major idea of human of
humankind
we suffer what do we do about it we
figure out how to bargain with the
future and we minimize suffering in that
manner it's like no other animal does
that either you know like the Lions they
just eat everything I think a wolf can
eat 40 pounds of meat in a single
sitting right it's like there's a meat
eat it
it's light not like save some mammoths
for tomorrow that's a that's that's not
a wolf thing man that's a human thing
and that might mean you have to be
hungry today
or maybe you're a farmer you know
several thousand years ago six thousand
years ago or so what agriculture first
got going and you're starving to death
waiting for the spring planting and you
think we bill it bloody well better not
eat those seeds right and that's really
something to be able to control yourself
to make the future real to put off what
you could use today and not just in some
impulsive manner man maybe your kids are
starving to death you think we are not
touching the seeds that we need to the
future and for human beings to have
discovered that and then to also have
figured out that we could bargain with
the future it's like man that's
something and I think that that I think
that the stories that are laid out in
this book actually describe at least in
part the process by which that occurred
the always stories begin with Genesis
2:4 this is the account of the heavens
and the earth wind so there's two real
creation stories at the beginning the
newer one which is the first one and the
older one which is the second one and
the older one begins in Chapter two and
that's the story that we're going to
that we are getting into now Adam and
Eve are in that can enable know what the
Tower of Babel in the yahwist strand
Exodus numbers along and there's some of
the priestly version in there too as
well as the Ten Commandments well there
are some lovely representations of a
paradise this is a Garden Earthly
Delights what's his name say the boss
yes I wrote it was boss he has a crazy I
mean if you how he didn't get burnt at
the stake is absolutely beyond me I mean
you know some of you know about salvador
deli i suppose most of you do I mean
delis a piker compared to Hieronymous
Bosch man
you could spend because there's three
pieces of this particular painting you
could spend a very bizarre and surreal
looking at that painting I don't know
what it was with Bosch but he was some
sort of creature that only popped up
once and probably for the best and so
there's been very many representations
of paradise I mean god only knows what
that is it's like I could probably guess
but I won't
and then look I mean that's that's
that's the lion lying down with the lamb
right so that's this idea that's maybe
projected back in time that there was a
time or maybe will be a time when when
that the horrors of life are no longer
necessary for life itself to exist right
and the horrors of life are of course
that everything eats everything else and
that everything dies and that
everything's born and that the whole
bloody place is at charnel-house and
it's it's a catastrophe from beginning
to end and this is this is the vision of
it being other than that and you know
there's a strong idea this is also in
implicit in the alchemical ideas and I
think it's also implicit in the
Scientific Revolution that human beings
can interact with reality in such a way
so that the tragic and evil elements of
it can be mitigated and so that we can
move somewhat closer to a state that
might be characterized Oh that's
obviously imagistic but it might be
characterized by something like that
where we have the benefits of actual
existence without all of the catastrophe
that seems to go along with it and Carl
Jung when he wrote about the emergence
of alchemy or the emergence of science
from alchemy he thought of science as
being motivated by a dream because for
Jung dream was the dream was the
manifestation of the instincts it was
the boundary between the instincts and
thinking said well science is nested
inside a dream and the dream is that if
we investigated the structures of
material reality with sufficient
attention and truth that we could then
learn enough about material reality to
alleviate suffering right to produce the
Philosopher's Stone to make everybody
wealthy to make everybody healthy to
make everyone live as long as they
wanted to live or perhaps forever that's
the goal to alleviate the catastrophe of
existence and that that idea the idea
that mysteries the solution to the
mysteries of life that might enable us
to develop such a substance or let's say
a multitude of substances provided the
motive for
for the development of science and
you'll trace that the development of
that mode of force really over a
thousand years and if you were
interested in reading his books on
alchemy which are extraordinarily
difficult and that's really saying
something about young because all of his
books are difficult and then the books
on alchemy they kind of take a quantum
leap that's actually very small leap so
I shouldn't say that they take a massive
leap into a whole different dimension of
complexity but that's what he was trying
to get at he went back into the
alchemical texts and interpreted them as
if they were the dream on which science
was founded Newton was an alchemist by
the way I mean you know goddesses are
certainly well supported by the
historical fact science did emerge out
of alchemy the question is what were the
alchemists up to and they were trying to
produce the Philosopher's Stone and that
was the universal medical meant for
mankind's pathology Jung felt that what
had happened was that you know
Christianity had promised that the
cessation of suffering promised it for a
thousand years and yet suffering went on
unabated and at the same time
Christianity had attempted to really put
emphasis on spiritual development let's
say at the expense of material
development right thinking of material
development as something akin to a sin
trying to get a control of impulsivity
and all the things that went along with
a to embodied existence there was a
reason for it but that by about a
thousand AD the European mind somewhat
educated by that point somewhat able to
concentrate on a single point perhaps
because of a very long history of
intense religious training turned its
dream to the unexplored material world
and thought well you know the spiritual
Redemption that we've been seeking
didn't appear to produce the result that
was promised or intended and so maybe
there's another place that we should
look and that was in the damned material
world right which which which was
supposed to be at least according to
some elements of classic thinking
nothing but the creation of the devil so
but the point I'm making is that you
know it's very difficult to
underestimate the amount of human
motivation that's embedded in the
attempt to alleviate suffering to
eradicate disease to help people live a
healthy a healthy life and that's the
disease obviously but to live a long
life as well and
make things as peaceful as possible I
mean you can be cynical about people and
you can talk about them as motivated by
power and being corrupt in all of those
things and all of those things are true
but you shouldn't throw away the baby
with the bathwater because we have been
striving for a very long time to set
things right and we've done actually not
too bad a job of it for half starving
crazy insect ridden chimpanzees with
life spans of 50 to 70 years so you know
we could deserve a bit of sympathy for
our position as far as I'm concerned so
[Applause]
some other representations this one I
like the one on the left
that's paradise has a walled garden and
that's what paradise means it's paradise
I which is I don't remember the language
it's it's it's a it's a it's associated
with Persian paradise that means walled
garden and why a walled garden well it
goes back to the chaos order idea so
this is where God puts man and woman
after the creation in a walled garden
well the wall is culture and order and
the garden is nature and the idea is the
proper human habitat is nature and
culture imbalance as well we like
Gardens well why because well they're
not completely covered with weeds and
mosquitoes and black flies right so
they're civilized a little bit but still
within that civilization nature in its
more benevolent guys is encouraged to
flourish and people find that
rejuvenating and so the idea that
paradise the proper habitat of a human
being is a walled garden is a good one
and it's walled because well you want to
keep things out right I mean raccoons
for example if you want to keep those
things out man even though it's
impossible and you know you don't you
don't want well there's all sorts of
things you don't want your garden like
snakes walls don't seem to be much use
against them but the idea that paradise
is a walled garden is is a an echo back
to the chaos order idea walls culture
right garden nature so the proper human
habitat is a properly tended garden now
the radical left-leaning anti-theist
environmentalists tend to make the case
that
the predations of the Western capitalist
system are consequence of the injunction
that was delivered in Genesis by God to
man to go out and dominate the earth
David Suzuki has talked a lot about this
by the way they believe that that
statement has given rise to our
inappropriate assumption that we have
the right to exert control over the
world and that that's what's turned us
into these terrible predatory monsters
sometimes described as cancers on the
face of the earth or viruses that have
inhabited the entire ecosystem who are
doing nothing but what wandering
everywhere and wreaking havoc as rapidly
as we possibly can which is another
perspective on the essential element of
humankind that I find absolutely
deplorable I mean if you look at the
historical record for example even
casually you'll find out that as early
as as late as the late 1800s 1895
thereabouts
Thomas Huxley who was Aldous Huxley's
grandfather and a great defender of
Darwin prepared a report for the British
government on oceans sustainability and
his conclusion was fish away guys man
there's so many fish out there the
oceans are so inexhaustible that no
matter how hard humanity tried for for
any number of years the probability that
we could do more than put a dent in what
was out there was a zero now Huxley
turned out to be wrong he didn't realize
that our population was going to spike
so dramatically partly because we got a
little bit rich and our children stopped
dying at the rate of like 60 percent
before they were one years old and you
know we actually managed to populate the
earth with a few people but it wasn't
really until 1960 or so that we woke up
to the fact that there were so many of
us that we actually had to start paying
attention to what we were doing to the
planet and that's like what 50 years ago
well we've just started to develop the
technology or the wherewithal to
understand that the whole world might be
well considered a garden and we need to
live inside the proper balance between
culture and order or culture and and and
chaos before that we were spending all
of our time just trying not to die
and usually very unsuccessfully so so I
don't agree with that interpretation of
the opening sections of Genesis I don't
believe that it's given human being the
right to act as super predators on the
planet I think that instead the proper
environment for human beings is
presented quite properly as a garden and
that the role of people and that's
explicitly stated in in the second story
in Adam and Eve was to tend the garden
and that means to make the proper
decisions and to make the sure that
everything thrives in flourishes and and
so that it's good for the things that
are living there that aren't just people
but also good for the people too so fine
I think we can we could at least note
that that's a slightly different take on
the story than the ultimately cynical
interpretation that's so commonly put
forward today now inside that wall
garden is a couple of trees and Adam and
Eve and some animals and all of that and
unfortunately the tree happens to have a
snake wrapped around it now that's an
interesting thing we're going to talk
about that a lot and the snake in both
of these representations is no ordinary
snake say it's got a human head and it's
got a human head there too so whatever
that snake is well let's forget about
looking at this from a religious
perspective like if you can just imagine
that you're an anthropologist we've
never seen this image before it's like
what do you see well you see walls and
you see something a fairly Pleasant
enclosure and then you see a tree and
people are eating from the tree but the
tree has a snake in it that has a human
head and so then you might think well
what's a snake with a human head and
then you'd think well it's half snake
and half human that's hardly revelatory
it's just self evidence so whatever that
snake is isn't just a snake it's snake
and human or it's it's its snake and
partakes in whatever human beings are
and that's very important so we'll
continue we'll consider that later and
you see the same thing here and and you
see in this particular version there's
the head this one also has wings and so
this is a winged snake sort of like a
dragon and so it curls on the ground
like a reptile and it's got an aerial
aspect or a spiritual aspect so here
it's a snake which is like the lowest
form of of reptilian life say
something that crawls on the ground it's
something that's human and something
that's spiritual at the same time and it
inhabits the tree which look a lot like
magic mushrooms by the way and you can
look that up if you want that's quite an
interesting little rabbit hole to wander
down if you're curious about it but but
there's an idea here too is that there
was something in the garden at the
beginning of time that was like a snake
that was like a person that was like
something that was winged it was
something spiritual so it's spiritual
human and reptilian all at the same time
and it's the animating spirit of the
tree okay so keep that in mind thus the
heavens and the earth were finished this
is in relationship to Genesis one and
all the host of them and on the seventh
day God ended his work which he had made
and he rested on the seventh day from
all his work which he had made and God
blessed the seventh day and sanctified
it because that in it he had rested from
all his work which God created the need
that's wisdom in that one - I think the
idea of the Sabbath you know because one
of the things I've worked with a lot of
people who were hyper conscientious and
thing about hyper conscientious people
is that they'll just work til they die
and that's actually not very productive
because then they're dead and they can't
work and so what you have to do with
hyper conscientious people is you have
to say well I know you'd rather do
nothing but work and maybe you're just
as guilty as you can possibly be when
you're not working but let's figure out
what you're up to and what you're up to
in all probability is the attempt to be
productive in the least problematic
longest sustaining possible manner and
that might mean you have to take a rest
and so one of the things I used to work
with lawyers with people who had risen
to the top of large law firms and they
were hyper productive types they're
often you know trying to hit their
impossible quota for yearly hours and
and burning themselves to a frazzle as a
consequence and one of the things that
we used to do was he couldn't work fewer
hours because that a day that just
didn't work but what we did was we have
them take more time off you know like a
four-day weekend every two months or
something that was plotted out into the
future and then we track their billable
hours which is the degree of
productivity it would actually increase
so that was so cool because you could
take hard-working people and you could
say look you know take a break why well
because you'll be more productive if you
take a break no that couldn't possibly
be like I should just work flat out all
the time it's like
to test that out you take a break now on
that it's like well what happened was
their productivity would increase often
by 10% so there's a there's wisdom here
too which is okay and this is alludes to
the Adam and Eve story near the end
you're self-conscious you discover the
future you have to work well then the
question is how much should you work and
one answer is you better bloody well
work all the time because no matter how
much work you do you're not solving your
problems they're coming along man and
you can stack up all the money you want
you can stack up all the wealth you want
it is not going to protect you in the
final analysis so you better be hitting
the ground running and you better run
flat out all the time well what happens
if you do that well then you die that's
not a good solution so maybe you should
rest and so how does that rest get
instantiate it well it's not easy to
tell but one way to do it let's say
conceptually is to say look even God had
the rest one day a week and so you don't
have to be so presumptuous to assume
that if God had dressed one day a week
that maybe you know you are allowed to
work non-stop without a break at all you
know and I think our culture has slipped
into that in quite a dangerous way
because everything is open all the time
and I mean I find that just as
convenient as the rest of you but you
know it's so strange to talk to modern
people because one of the things they
always tell you we say well how are you
and what do they always say they don't
say good they don't say bad they say
busy like yeah well okay this is where
Genesis 2 starts and we finally got
there these are the generations of the
heavens and of the earth when they were
created in the day that the Lord God
made the earth in the heavens and every
plant of the field before it was in the
earth and every herb of the field before
it grew for the Lord God had not caused
it to rain upon the earth and there was
not a man to till the ground but there
went up a mist from the earth and
watered the whole face of the ground and
the Lord God formed man of the dust of
the ground and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life and man
became a living soul well you know
there's some archaic thinking and there
the breath is life right that's psyche
that's spirit that's inspiration that's
respiration that's that's also citizens
it's numa like pneumatic
hire its its breath and the reason that
people associated life with breath well
that's not so foolish you know I mean
you're breathing man and something you
do all the time and when you die you
start breathing and so the idea that
there's something integral to life about
breathing it's a perfectly reasonable
supposition it actually happens to be
very true and now then to associate the
act of creation with the act of first of
all inspiration and respiration and and
the breathing of life into something
that was inanimate is is well what do
you expect for a one-sentence
description it's not a bad one sentence
description you know so and the Lord God
planted a garden eastward in Eden and
Eden means well watered place and that's
particularly relevant I suppose if
you're a desert dweller right because
the issue there is can you get enough
water to make things grow and so the the
walled garden which is paradise is also
Eden which is a well watered place and
water has the element of chaos we
already saw that in relationship to
Genesis one where the underlying chaos
was often assimilated symbolically to
water and so the idea too is that a
certain amount of chaos has to be
brought into the order in order for it
to be fruitful and you can see that in
the form of allowing in the water and
out of the ground made the Lord God to
grow every tree that is pleasant to the
sight and good for food The Tree of Life
also in the midst of the garden and the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil
so two trees are marked out among the
rest one is the Tree of Life and one is
the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil now you know you know when you read
something like that if you're thinking
about it that you're in a metaphorical
space now we've got to be careful about
metaphors because you know I could say
yeah that the chaos order idea is a
metaphor but then I also said oh wait a
second it's a metaphor but it's also
what your brain is adapted to and so you
know let's just not be pushing the idea
that it's merely a metaphor too hard and
the same thing is here is happening here
these are metaphors the tree of life
when the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil but that doesn't exactly mean
that they're mere metaphors because
sometimes as I mentioned before and as
if you have a set of things and you
abstract out from them a common element
you can make a strong case that the
common element is
more real than the set of things from
which you extracted it that's the whole
utility in abstraction why would you
bother with it otherwise if you can't
take a set of things and say look
there's something in common across the
set of things it's more important than
the differences between them then you
wouldn't bother abstracting at all and
so the Tree of Life and the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil are
abstractions now one of the questions is
this is a tough one man I've been trying
tried to figure out for a long time why
a fruit and something you eat would be
associated with the transformations of
psychology because that's basically what
happens in the Adam and Eve story why
would it be something that you eat now
Eric Newman who is one of Ewing students
had written a fair bit about this and
got a fair ways with it he said well you
know we do have noted we've noticed
forever that the act of eating
especially if you're hungry especially
if you're starving produces a rapid
spiritual transformation right I mean
some of you this is worth knowing you
probably have a Crabby partner or child
because everyone does and one thing you
might try is that if they get erratic
during the day and you know get all
volatile about nothing at all just give
them something to eat
really I'll tell you man made this sauce
if I do this with my clinical clients
all the time it's like they say well I
fly off the handle at the littlest
things like okay yeah just try this for
a week when you're crabby and
unreasonable eat a piece of cheese or
eat a peanut butter sandwich eat
something that's high protein high fat
and then just wait ten minutes and see
if you're sane and you'll find out that
you're saying after you eat so often
that you just can't believe how crazy
you are when you're hungry
look here's it's really absolutely
bloody remarkable so I'm telling you try
this
it'll-it'll especially if you don't eat
breakfast this will change your life and
so here's a practical bit of information
for you too for all of you
antisocial types who are going to end up
in prison so if you're in prison and you
want to go on parole okay so you have to
go in front of the judge and tell them
why you're not going to do it again so
here's the deal here's the deal it
doesn't really matter what you did and
it doesn't really matter what you
promise what matters is whether you see
the judge before lunch or after lunch
because if you see the judge after lunch
probability that you'll get parole is
60% higher yeah right that is just like
so never have an argument with your
partner when you're hungry or when
they're hungry especially if you want
something from them it's like here's the
sandwich they'll eat it then they'll be
happy then you can manipulate them
because before that man no so you know
it's not that unreasonable to think that
there's a spirit in food because food
rejuvenates and it just doesn't
rejuvenate you physically it rejuvenates
you spiritually and then of course
there's the other things that we consume
that aren't exactly like food that have
a walloping spiritual impact like
alcohol let's say which is a spirit and
is regarded Dionysius right I mean it's
the god of the vine and the god of the
vine possesses you and makes you act all
the fun ways that alcohol makes you act
you know the fun ways that you regret
the next day and so there's the
spiritual element of that too and and
then but there's something even deeper
that I think is so cool that's
associated with food and information
because the story of Adam and Eve
represents the fruit as producing a
psychological transformation and so the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil
is an abstraction across trees and it's
trying to say here's something that's
common across trees it's it's a fruit
that's common across trees it's
something like that and so the fruit
across its common across trees is
something you might call food fair
enough that's a generalization but
here's something that's even more cool
the food that's stable across the entire
domain of food isn't food it's
information its information and we use
the same bloody circuits in our brain to
forage for information that squirrels
use to forage for food but animals used
to forage for food it's the same circuit
and why is that because we figured out
that knowing where things is knowing
where the food is is more important than
having the food and so so knowing where
the food is is a form of massive food
information is a form of meta food and
once you have well that's why we're
information foragers and so once you
grasp that and and that ideas is
embedded into the story of Adam and Eve
so whatever it is that they ingest is a
form
meta food it's it's infinite information
and and you know we'll trade food for
information right so if you're stuck on
the edge of the highway and you know
your your hoods up and you're you're
going places thing has turned into a
pile of junk that you don't understand
and somebody pulls beside you up beside
you in their mechanic and they point to
something to say well just put that wire
back on there you'll immediately give
them a sandwich right or you'll offer
them something in return you know what I
mean because they've provided you with
information that has value and it has
value because it actually provides you
with energy because information provides
you with energy because otherwise why
would we bother with it and so food
provides energy but so does information
and so there's the there's the idea of
food that you abstract from everything
you can eat but then there's the idea of
what you could abstract from all sources
of food and the answer to that would be
information and the trees that are being
referred to in Adam and Eve are these
method trees they're not ordinary trees
just like paradise is no ordinary place
like Adam and Eve are no ordinary people
and just like the logos that God is
using at the beginning of time is no
ordinary conception and these aren't
they're not metaphors there more than
metaphors there I think of them as hyper
realities it's something like that is
there more real than what you see there
more real than the reality that presents
itself to you and lots of things are
like that right numbers are like that we
wouldn't think or abstract if there
weren't things that were more real than
what we can see so what's most real well
that's partly what we're trying to
figure out and out of the ground make
the Lord God to grow every tree that is
pleasant to the sight and good for food
The Tree of Life also in the midst of
the garden and the tree of knowledge of
good and evil and a river went out of
Eden to water the garden and from thence
it was parted and became into foreheads
that's produced a tremendous amount of
speculation now you know the Garden of
Eden is also the holy city that's
another way of thinking about or it's
Jerusalem right or it's the ideal state
which could be the ideal city or to be
an ideal state of being or could be the
ideal site here if all of those things
stacked up at the same time right this
is a Mandela and this is the Mandela
form that people what we call
hypothesised that constituted the
structure of paradise you notice it's
got this cross form that's eaten itself
and there's the
the center of Eden and there's the
rivers those are rivers not snakes those
are the rivers that go out of it and
they're turned into these mandela images
that are representative of what Jung
described as the self which would be the
center element of being that he
associated of conscious being that he
associated with divinity I would say but
also with the idea of the holy city so
I'm just showing you that to show you
what where the imagination has taken
ideas of paradise so the name of the
first river is Pisan that is which
compasses the whole land of havilah
whether is gold and the gold of that
land is good there's bdellium and the
Onyx stone and the name of the second
river is gijón the same is it that
compasseth the whole land of ethiopia
and the name of the third river is heady
kal or Hideki I don't know that is it
which goes towards the east of Assyria
and the fourth River is the Euphrates so
there's this strange intermingling there
of geography with mythical geography
right which you see happen fairly
frequently in the books and the Lord God
took the man and put him in the Garden
of Eden to dress it and keep it okay so
that's that's a good that's a good
command that's what you're supposed to
do is take care of the damn thing with a
lot of work to make right took a whole
week and the Lord God commanded the man
saying of every tree of the garden thou
mayest freely eat but of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil thou shalt
not eat of it for in the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die
well there's a sponge of questions there
that people have been puzzling they're
puzzling over for a long time gaudy he's
tricky character in the story of Adam
and Eve it's like okay if we can't eat
the damn thing well why put in the
garden to begin with that would be one
question and you made us and then you
told us not to eat this knowing
perfectly well that the first thing we
were going to do is eat it because
people are of exactly that type which is
that if you say to them with their
insatiable curiosity this is all fine
and nice but over here is something you
should never look at and then you leave
the room it's like everybody is over
there trying to figure what the hell
that thing is instantly right because
we're curious curious curious curious
creatures and so you have to wonder
exactly what God was up to here and
there's Gnostic speculation that the
original God
was not really a very good God he was
kind of an unconscious evil god and that
he wanted his creation to be unconscious
and so forbade them from developing
consciousness and that it was a higher
God who and maybe in the form of the
serpent who tempted human beings towards
consciousness and you know that that
idea got scrubbed out of classic
Christianity pretty early although
there's something that's interesting
about it and there are remnants of it in
different forms that stayed inside the
story like the idea that the fall was
you know a terrible tragedy but on the
other hand it was the precondition for
the greatest event in history which was
the birth of Christ and the redemption
of mankind and so it's complicated let's
put it that way god only knows what God
was up to but you know this is a good
example of that ambivalence to me again
that it's an indication of the
sophistication of the people who put
these stories together I also consider
this somewhat miraculous because you
know if you were just a simple
propagandist of sorts you wouldn't leave
this sort of complexity in the text you
just get rid of that because if you're a
propagandist everything is supposed to
make sense along the ideological plane
and here God is supposed to be good it's
like well we better get there to that
line because something's up with it and
obvious what it is but that isn't what
people did and to me that indicates that
that they were doing two things as they
were trying not to be too careless with
the traditions that they were handed
they they were they were touching them
at their peril they were very careful
with them and also that they were
actually trying to understand what was
going on because why otherwise keep this
why not just simplify it or maybe just
to tribute this to the devil that would
be easier and having God do it but and
the Lord God said it is not good that
man should be alone I will make help
meet for him none of the ground the Lord
God formed every beast of the field at
every fall of the air and brought them
unto Adam to see what he would call them
and whatsoever Adam called every living
creature that was the name thereof and
Adam gave names to all the cattle in the
fall of cattle means animals basically
and to the fall of the air and every
beast of the field but for Adam there
was not found to help meet for him okay
well a couple of things there
speculations number one it's like why
does God care what Adam calls the
animals and the answer that seems to be
it's associated again with the magic of
speech right so that we know according
to the story that human beings were
already made in the image of God and
that God used language in order to call
order forth from chaos and that human
beings were made in that image and so
there's an echo of that here even though
it's from an independent tradition in
the echo is the thing isn't quite real
till you name it and that's quite and
that's that's an interesting thing and
we don't exactly know how far that
extends it's certainly the case that
like seeing things often exist in a
strange potential form interconnected
form where everything's confusing like a
massive confusion before you put your
finger on it name it what's going on
here you name it it's like it it carves
it out from all that underlying chaos it
makes it into Agrippa Belen today that
you can then contend with and you might
say well it was real before you named it
it's like well yes it was real before
you named it the same way things are
there when there's no one there to
perceive them and it isn't obvious how
things are there when you're not there
to perceive them I'll tell you something
bloody weird about perception you can
look this up at John Wheeler John
Leader's a physicist so here's a really
cool thing let's say you go outside at
night and you look up and you see a star
and like so a photon from That star
enters your eye then maybe that photon
has been cruising along for like 30
million years do you know that that
photon would not have been emitted from
that star at that time if your eye
wasn't there at that time to receive it
you think well how the hell can that
because it happened 20 million years ago
it's like well I don't know how it can
be to tell you the truth but I know that
John Wheeler has done a very good job of
detailing out why that's true and
necessarily true and so in wheeler is
also the physicists who develop the
notion of it from bit and he believes
that the world is best construed as a
the potential of the world is best
construed as a place of information it's
something like leading information and
at what consciousness does is transform
the latent Internet in information into
something like concrete reality he
doesn't mean that metaphorically and one
of the cases that he makes in that
regard is this story that I just told
you is that the photon couldn't have
left
from where it was unless it had a place
to go now it's it's complicated and
confusing because from the perspective
of a beam of light from a photon there
is no time and there's no distance from
one point to another when of course
that's completely impossible to
understand - but from the perspective of
a photon the universe is completely flat
perpendicular to the direction that the
photon is traveling so it's there and
here at the same time for us it's not
it's like 20 million years ago but for
the photon it's it's all here and now so
anyways the reason I'm telling you all
that is because the relationship between
consciousness and reality is by no means
straightforward it is seriously not
straightforward and physicists
physicists debate what the relationship
is between consciousness and reality and
they debate about what the sort of
phenomena that I just described mean and
I'm not really qualified to enter into
that debate because I'm not a physicist
but I do know and I've read it for a bit
of wheeler as but as much of it as I can
understand and I do at least know that
that's what he claimed and I also know
that that claim is not that's the claim
that's taken seriously among physicists
of the caliber of the physicists who can
understand wheeler so that's pretty
interesting so anyways there is emphasis
again on this importance of naming in
order to make things real you know and
sometimes people won't name things just
so they don't become real so you know if
you're if you have a relationship which
undoubtedly you do and it has problems
which undoubtedly it does you bloody
well know that lots of times there's
something under the carpet that no one
wants to name and everybody's thinking
well as long as we don't name it it's
not really there and in some sense it
really isn't there because you could act
as if it's not there and get away with
it at least for short periods of time it
sees you name that thing it's like you
give it form and it's there and no one
can ignore it and that's annoying
because then you have to deal with it or
Noor or face the consequences but the
reason I'm telling you that is because
we have a an intuition even that we can
have things not exist by not naming them
you name it and it comes forward with
staggering clarity and it's not as if
naming it is the only thing that gives
it reality but it is something like it
sharpens it brings it into focus and
gives it borders and barriers and
borders and boundaries and so anyways
gods interested enough in what Adam has
to
say that he has him name all the animals
and that sort of makes them into animals
now there's more to the linguistic story
than that so the social psychologist
Roger Brown was one of them studied this
really interesting phenomena which is
associated with relationship between
perception and action you know how a kid
will call a particular animal a cat well
the word cat is very short like the word
dog and it turns out that you know you
could think that we could perceive cats
as multicellular organisms like we could
see the cells we could see the molecules
we could see the atoms we could see or
we could see the ecosystem that the cat
is part of but we don't or maybe the
broader mammalian classification that
it's part of we could perceive that as
the unit of perception but we don't we
perceive things at the level of cat and
you can tell the perceptual level that
people naturally perceive that which
doesn't seem to be socio-culturally
determined to any great degree by the
way because the words are often short
and easily remembered and early learned
and so there's this level of analysis
out of all the possible levels of
analysis that the world does exist that
we perceive it at a certain level of
analysis and that level of analysis
seems to have something to do with the
world's functional utility for us at
that level and the perception at that
level and the naming at that level gives
things a reality at that level you know
because the thing about things is that
they're not easily separable from other
things they tangled together in all
sorts of strange ways and yet when we
cast our eye and and use our language to
orient ourselves in the world we cut
things up into discrete discriminable
objects that we can then utilize and
there's something about that that makes
them real in a way that they're
interconnected potential the
interconnected potential that they were
before that that it's not it's not real
in the same way at least I think it's
even less real I think that's the right
way of thinking about it even though
it's not completely unreal but it's an
echo atoms a little God at that point a
little God the Father and God's already
done the groundwork but Adam has to come
along and says say well that's a cat
it's like poof whatever that is is now a
cat and that's
dog and that's a sheep and you know it
gives them it gives them something like
pragmatic form but for Adam there was
not found to help meet for him and the
Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon Adam and he slept and he and God
took one of his ribs and closed up the
flesh instead thereof and the rib which
the Lord God had taken from man made he
a woman and brought her unto the man and
Adam said this is now bone of my bones
and flesh of my flesh she shall be
called woman because she was taken out
of man therefore shall a man leave his
father and his mother and shall cleave
unto his wife and they shall be one
flesh that's a walloping statement to
put in there at the end of those three
sentences and therefore comes as
somewhat of a surprise but there's an
injunction there well it's a good
injunction man you'll tell you people
who don't do that they have a hell of a
time in their marriage and so this is a
good thing to know if you are married or
if you're planning to get married is
like you know we have very strong
orientation towards our parents and for
good reason it's like the injunction
here is that secondary since you're
married and and failure to do that makes
your marriage collapse and then you
deserve it to collapse - as far as I'm
concerned because it's a reflection of
your pathological immaturity and your
unwillingness to extract yourself from
the you know tellin like grip of parents
who are a little bit too much on the
interfering side but the injunction
there's a deep injunction here it's very
complicated so one of the ideas is that
the original Adam wasn't a man like like
a separate man it was more like a
hermaphroditic being and in that him
alfred etic being there was a kind of
undifferentiated perfection and then
that was split into male and female and
then that part of the goal of human
beings is to reunite that as the
singular unity that reestablishes the
initial perfection and that's actually
the goal of marriage from a spiritual
perspective and you could read about
that if you read young because he wrote
quite a bit about that so lovely it's
such a good idea so I had these friends
that went to Sweden to get married they
were northern they were from northern
Alberta but his heritage their both
their Heritage's were Sweden Swedish and
in this ceremony they did this cool
thing yes they were being married and
they had two
hold a candle up between them right
while they were being married and you
think well okay what's the candle that's
a source of light the source of
illumination right the source of
enlightenment it's the candle that you
put on Christmas trees in Europe so it's
the light that emerges in the darkness
in the depth of winter it's a symbol of
life in darkness it's the reemergence of
the Sun that the at the darkest coldest
time of the year which is also
associated symbolically with the birth
of Christ for all sorts of complicated
reasons and so the candles all that and
then the next question is why do you
hold it above you and the answer is
because what's above you is what you're
below too
so it's single simplify something
transcendent and so why do you both hold
on to it well because you're both
supposed to hold on to the light right
and you're supposed to be subordinate to
the light and so you ask well who's in
charge in marriage well the light that's
the idea so you come together as one
thing you no longer two things
it isn't what's good for you and it's
not what's good for your wife it's
what's good for the marriage and the
marriage is about the combined being
which is the reassembly of the original
hefferman herma frenetic hermaphroditic
being at the beginning of time that's
the idea
and that's all packed into like these
four sentences and you know there's been
well all of these sentences have
tremendous history of interpretation
associated with them right it's just
endless and endless and endless and
that's one of the lines and so it's also
an antidote to the idea that women taken
out of man which is obviously the
reverse of the biological process by the
way makes women in some sense
subordinate to man that is not built
into this text I don't see that at all
is built into the text and there's
something else that's associated with it
too and there's an idea that you know in
in Sleeping Beauty you know what
Sleeping Beauty goes to sleep and the
reason she goes to sleep is because you
have to remember what happens is she has
parents who are quite old and so they're
pretty desperate to have a child like so
many people are now and they only have
one child like so many people do now and
they wanted it happen to this child
because like hey it's a miracle and
there's only one of them and so she's
the princess and so it's like
we're not letting anything around here
so they have a big christening party
right and they invite everybody but they
don't invite Maleficent and Maleficent
is the terrible mother she's nature
she's like the thing that goes bump in
the night she's the devil herself
so to speak she's everything that you
don't want your child to encounter so
the king and queen saying well we just
want to invite her to the christening
it's like good luck with that
that's an eatable story right the
eatable mother is the mother who devours
her child by refusing by over protecting
him or her so that instead of being
strengthened by an encounter with the
terrible world they're weakened by too
much protection and then when they're
let out into the world they cannot live
and that's the story of Sleeping Beauty
and that's what the king and queen do
and they apologize to the two Maleficent
when she first shows up and say well you
know they have a bunch of half-witted
excuses why they don't invite her we
forgot like I don't think so you know
you don't forget something like that and
she kind of makes that point it's right
the whole horror of life you don't
forget about that when you have a child
that's for sure you might wish that it
would stay at bay but you do not forget
about it the question is do you invite
it to the party and the answer is it
bloody well depends how unconscious you
want your child to be and if you want
your child to be unconscious well then
you have the added advantage but maybe
they won't leave home and so you can
take advantage of them for the rest of
your sad life instead of going off to
find something to do for yourself well
and then of course you can take revenge
on them if they do have any any what
would you call impetus towards courage
that you sacrificed yourself 30 years
ago and want to stamp out as soon as you
see it developing your child that's
another thing that would be quite
pleasant and so that's what happens in
Sleeping Beauty yeah well none of this
is pleasant and nothing that happens in
that story is pleasant so Sleeping
Beauty she's naive as hell they put her
out in the forest and have her raised by
these three like goody-two-shoes fairies
that are also completely devoid of any
real potency and power right there's no
nothing Maleficent about them and then
the first idiot Prince that wanders by
she falls in love with so badly that she
has post-traumatic stress disorder when
he rides off on his horse great that's
what happened and then she then she goes
into the castle and she's all freaked
out because she met the love of her life
for like five minutes for God's sake and
you know that's when the
spinning wheel that's the Wheel of Fate
pops up and she pricks her finger right
I try to get rid of all the spinning
wheels they try to get rid of all the
wheels of fate with her pointed end but
she finds it poke pricks her fingers and
frame her and falls down unconscious
while she wants to be unconscious and no
bloody wonder she was protected her
whole life she's so damn naive that her
first love affair just about kills her
she wants to go to sleep and never wake
up and so that's exactly what happens
and then she has to wait for the prince
to come and rescue her well you think
how sexist can you get that story well
seriously because that's that's the way
that that would be read and in the
modern world it's like she doesn't need
a prince to rescue her that's why I
Disney made frozen that absolutely
appalling piece of rubbish so you know
you can say you can say well the
princess doesn't need a prince to rescue
her but you know that's a boneheaded way
of looking at the story because the
prince isn't just a man who's coming to
rescue the woman and believe me he's got
his own problems right he's got a whole
goddamn dragon he has to contend with
but but the prince also represents the
woman's own consciousness the
consciousness is presented very
frequently in story that's symbolically
masculine as it is with the logos idea
and the idea is that without without
that forward going courageous
consciousness a woman herself will drift
into unconsciousness and terror and so
you can read it as well the woman who's
sleeping needs a man to wake her up and
of course just like a man needs a woman
to wake him up it's the same damn thing
that's the dragon fight in Sleeping
Beauty but it's also the case that if
she's only unconscious all she can do is
lay there and sleep like the sleep of
the naive and Damned she has to wake and
wake herself up and and bring her own
consciousness or own masculine
consciousness into the forefront so that
she can survive in the world of course
women are trying to do that like mad but
that's partly what's represented in the
story like that and that's partly what's
implicit in this idea is that unless the
woman is taken out of man so to speak
then she isn't a human being she's just
a creature and that's partly what's
embedded in this story so you don't want
to read it as a patriarchal
you want to read anything that way so
really it's it really it's yeah I will I
won't bother without but really we can
do better than that man therefore shall
a man leave his father and his mother
and shall cleave unto his wife and they
shall be one flesh
it's like ya seeing the other thing
about marriage this is really worth
knowing too is that I've learned this in
part from reading young it's like what
do you do when you get married that's
easy you take someone who's just as
useless and horrible as you are and then
you shackle yourself to them and then
you say we're not running away no matter
what happens yeah well that that's
perfect because then you don't get to
run away and the thing is is like if you
can run away you can't tell each other
the truth because if you tell someone
the truth about you and they don't run
away they weren't listening and so if
you don't have someone around the can't
run away then you can't tell them the
truth and so that's part of the purpose
of the marriage it's like okay okay I'll
bet on you you bet on me it's a losing
bet we both know that but given our
current circumstances were unlikely to
find anyone better that's for sure
you know there's two things that come
off of that one is you know people are
waiting around to find mr. or mrs. right
it's like here's something to think
about man to put yourself on your feet
right if you went to a party and you
found mr. right and he looked at you and
didn't run away screaming that would
indicate that he wasn't mr. right at all
right it's like the old Nietzsche and
joke if someone loves you that should
immediately disenchant you with them
right right or it's the Woody Allen joke
I never belonged to a club that would
take me as a member so so that's a
that's an interesting that's a very
interesting thing to think about and so
you're going to shackle yourself to
someone who's just as imperfect as you
are and then the issue is you you you
might be in a situation where you can
actually negotiate because you might say
well there's some things about you that
aren't going so right and there's some
things about me that aren't going so
right and we're bloody well stuck with
the consequences for the next 50 years
so we could we can either straighten
this out or we can suffer through it for
the next five decades and you know
people are of this
or that without that degree of
seriousness those problems will not be
solved you'll leave things unnamed
because there's always an ounce like and
it's the same thing when you're living
together with someone you know that
people who live together before they're
married are more likely to get divorced
not less likely and the reason for that
is what exactly are you saying to one
another when you live with each other
just think about it well for now you're
better than anything else I can trick
but I'd like to reserve the right to
trade you in conveniently if someone
bitter happens to stumble into me
well how could how could someone not be
insulted to their core by an offer like
that now they're willing to play along
with it because they're going to do the
same thing with you now well that's
exactly and it's like yeah yeah I know
you're not going to commit to me so that
means you don't value me or our
relationship above everything else but
as long as I get to escape if I need to
then I'm willing to put up with that
it's like that's a hell of a say I mean
you might think how stupid is it to
shackle yourself to someone it's like
it's stupid man there's no doubt about
that
but compared to the alternatives it's
pretty damn good because without that
shackling there are things you will
never ever learn because you'll avoid
them you can always leave and if you can
leave then you don't have to tell each
other the truth it's as simple as that
because you can just leave and then you
don't have anyone you can tell the truth
to so there are some representations of
the idea of the original it's not this
isn't all Adam this is this is an old
Chinese symbol I think it's Fuxi and new
I think I have the pronunciation wrong
but it's really cool see it's see the
snakes down here they're kind of like a
DNA symbol which I find very interesting
and so that's the original cosmic
serpent that's sort of the potential out
of which that emerges and then that's
the differentiation of that into male
and female and so that's like the
predatory unknown that's one way of
thinking about it that's the most
fundamental conception of mankind is
something like that is the predatory
unknown and then the bifurcation of that
into the two fundamental cognitive
elements of human perception masculine
and female and you see the same thing
here this is Chinese this is Egyptian
also extraordinarily old it's the it's
the great serpent that underlies
everything Matt advocating itself into
Isis queen of the underworld and Osiris
king of the king of king of King Pharaoh
king of order you see the same thing in
an old alchemical symbol I love this one
it looks quite a lot like the little
thing that Harry Potter chases around it
yeah and that's not accidental by the
way because the seeker is the thing the
thing that chases this and the seeker
that chases this and catches it wins and
that's a really old idea and how the
hell'd JK Rowling knew that I cannot
figure out because that is a very very
archaic symbol arcane symbol on Google
it's called the round
chaos and the only reference to the
round chaos that I can find on Google is
on my web page and so I have no idea how
Rowling came up with that I mean I know
she looked at a lot of old texts but the
idea that if you play the meta game and
you catch this you win all the games is
exactly right not and that's the motif
for what's the name of that Quidditch
yeah so there's the potential that's
like the potential out of which God made
the world at the beginning of time and
what emerges out of that is some kind of
that's a dragon you know that in the
dragon fight that's partly the serpent
that's in the Garden of Eden and then
that's the manifestation of masculine
and feminine out of that potential
predatory unknown masculine and feminine
it's like a single it's like a single
representation of the evolutionary
history of human cognitive consciousness
so cool and that's also an image of the
ideal it's the union of Sun and Moon and
it's this hyper creature hermaphroditic
it's also the Adam and Eve that existed
at the beginning of time before the fall
and it's the purpose of marriage all of
that as a sacrament all of that in these
images it's just absolutely unbelievable
what images can pack into them and
there's a more classical representations
of Eve being extracted from Adam and
this is a cool line and they were both
naked the man and his wife and we're not
ashamed
well that see someone who wrote that
would only write that like that if they
were surprised that they weren't ashamed
because why would you point it out
otherwise and so there's this intimation
that of two things number one is there
was a point at time in time when human
beings were naked and they weren't
ashamed of it and there is a point of
time which is now where they're naked
and they are ashamed of it and then the
question is well what's the association
with nakedness and shame and that's all
often given a sexual connotation in in
classic interpretations of the Adam and
Eve story because of its association
with nudity I presume but I think it's a
lot more complicated than that so you
think I know I would notice my daughter
she probably won't be very happy that
I'm revealing this in this lecture but
my daughter was never really concerned
about nudity when she was a little kid
all the same to her one way or another
but my son by the time he was three man
that kid was private he his his bedroom
door was shut the bathroom door was shut
it was like get the hell out of here and
that seemed to just happen of its own
accord and you know we had two children
and one was like that the other one
wasn't I didn't think we had much to do
with it at all but it was really
fascinating to watch that emerge in him
and you know that that sense of of
self-consciousness does seem to emerge
in children somewhere around the age of
three and you know that's generally also
when we start thinking that maybe having
your baby wander around naked on a beach
isn't exactly the best idea there's this
there's something like that it's the
nudity and children is generally okay
under some circumstances in public
display we seem to think of that as
merely as acceptable why I don't know
why it stops being acceptable well that
has something to do with sexuality
obviously but it's a very complicated
phenomena but you know that whole nudity
thing is then is a very complicated
thing I mean first of all people are
kind of strange because we're hairless
roughly you know compared to most
animals and we don't know why that is
some people think it's because we lost
our heroin we're wandering around in the
debt in the desert running around in
Africa because we're really really good
runners we can run down animals say like
a human being in good shape can run a
horse to death in a week we can really
run man and a lot of our ancestors the
Kalahari Bushmen still do this they just
run an animal for like until it dies and
that Bushman doesn't die I mean they
also sometimes shoot them with poison
arrows but they can just run them till
they die so we have tremendous endurance
and you and you have to be able to get
rid of a lot of heat if you're going to
run around in the desert so we don't
have much hair that's one explanation
and Buckminster Fuller had an
interesting explanation which was he
thinks that at some point during our
evolution we spend a lot of time near
the water and so we're like fish Apes
something like that well you know we
like to be on the beach and there's lots
of food there and we like to swim and
we're really good at swimming for
terrestrial creatures and we cry salt
tears like some seagoing creatures - and
women have a layer of subcutaneous fat
like some seagoing creatures - and we
have kind of our feet are which are very
odd things are kind of good for flapping
in the water although we can also walk
with them and so he thought that maybe
that adaptation was too
water existence like seals and so forth
like we kind of went back to the ocean
but not quite and so but anyways the
evolution of that hairlessness is an
interesting thing but it certainly does
make us exposed to the world in a way
that animals that have a covering of fur
aren't and then we're upright which is
very strange because most animals aren't
they're on all fours and so they're very
vulnerable parts are protected and not
exposed to view and then of course when
you're standing up nude your your your
visit let's call it your
psychophysiological quality is on
painful display right and people
complain about that all the time you
know if you look at the feminist tack
for example on beauty the idea that
women have eating disorders is directly
attributed to the presence of too many
beautiful women on the cover of
magazines something like that even
though women buy those magazines and
they're attracted to the bandar mood
goes up when they purchase them and if
the if the stimulus was negative the
women would avoid the magazines and not
buy them so as a theory it's a very very
bad one but it's still the case that you
know it's still the case that standards
of beauty shame people and that's for
sure and everyone because if you're not
ugly now man you're going to be at some
point in your life so that's kind of a
rough thing to contend with right it's
it's a rough thing to to know that that
there's an ideal that you could be and
maybe even one swear that you're not
going to be for long or Norden or never
were and it's really an appalling issue
because I think it's harder on women
because women are judged by men more for
their what for their youth and fertility
that's how it turns out from the
evolutionary point of view men are
judged more on their socioeconomic
status by women it's harsh both ways but
so anyways it's you know it's a terrible
thing to to carry the knowledge with you
that you're exposed to the most serious
possible evaluation of the quality of
your being that you can possibly be
exposed to all the time and that that's
further amplified if you're without
clothing and so part of clothing is
protection but a tremendous amount of it
is merely stopping other people from
evaluating you too harshly all the time
it just gets in the way so
anyways this store this this story makes
the case that at some point we would
like that well animals aren't like that
so it seems perfectly plausible at at
some point we weren't like that but at
some point that changed and they were
both naked the man and his wife and
we're not ashamed of a serpent was more
subtle than any beast of the field which
the Lord God had made and he said unto
the woman yea hath God said ye shall not
eat of every tree of the garden I like
this this is um oh I can't remember who
did the edging yell who is it da-rae
yeah DeRay exactly he door a did
etchings for Paradise Lost that are
absolutely remarkable and this is Satan
and this is the snake here and of course
in the Genesis story Satan is weirdly
associated with the snake and I'll tell
you that's a that's a that's a tough one
to sort out because in the story of Adam
and Eve there's no indication whatsoever
that the serpent who tempts Eve is also
Satan the author of all evil and how in
the world those two stories got tangled
together well I think I figured that out
and I'm going to tell you that tonight
but it took a very long time to figure
it out and it's absolutely it's so
bloody brilliant I just can't believe
that people figured it out it's so it's
so unbelievably spectacularly brilliant
and that's a that's a an intimation of
that idea right that there's a kinship
between these two things so anyways the
serpents more subtle than any beast of
the field subtle is an interesting word
this is from the oxford english
dictionary
so because will amplify the word a bit
this is what you do in Union dream
interpretation for example is to kind of
look at the connotations of the concepts
that are associated with the dream
subtle of a person or animal and action
behavior crafty cunning sly treacherous
so it's something that sort of sneaks
along right it's not something that you
really pick up on that easily of a look
or glance sly furtive surreptitious of a
person skillful expert clever of a work
of art mechanical device cleverly made
or designed ingenious well that that's I
think that's all fairly all those terms
so far are fairly well attributed to
snakes I mean they are very cool things
and and they are very well designed
they're quite remarkable and
they're also very subtle on the nature
of or involving careful discrimination
of fine points or fine points difficult
to understand and abstruse of a person
the mind or intellectual activity
intellectual activity characterized by
wisdom and perceptiveness discriminating
discerning and truth that's interesting
because Milton's Satan is also the
intellect and you know you see that very
often you know it's so often the bad
guys an evil scientist right and there's
something about and then you see the
same thing in the Lion King with scar
I mean scars and intellect and arrogant
deceitful intellect there's nothing
stupid about scar he's not wise but he's
the he's the evil voice that's always
whispering in the Kings ear and that's
associated with the pride of the
intellect and the Catholics had warned
warned humanity about the pride of the
intellect for centuries that's partly
what produced somewhat of the schism
between Catholicism and science although
that's much overstated if you look at
the historical record the idea was that
the intellect has its own particular
it's a remarkable faculty let's say it's
the highest angel in God's heavenly
kingdom that's the way that Milton
portrayed it but it's also the thing
that can go most terribly wrong because
intellect the intellect can become
arrogant about its own existence and
accomplishments and it can fall in love
with its own products and that's what
happens when your ideological II
possessed because you end up with a
Dogma like say a human constructed Dogma
in Solzhenitsyn's words that possesses
you completely of which you believe is
100% right right so it eradicate the
necessity for anything transcendent and
so that's the subtil element of the
intellect that's associated symbolically
with the snake in the garden of paradise
of a feeling scent sensation acute and
keen involving distinctions that are
finer delicate especially to such an
extent as to be difficult to discern or
analyze also almost imperceptible and
elusive having little thickness or
breadth thin fine subtil matter now
historical rarefied mouth barely there
at all and the women said unto the
serpent we may eat of the fruit of the
trees of the garden one of
the fruit of the tree which is in the
midst of the garden God this God has
said he shall not eat of it neither
shall you touch it lest you die and the
serpent said to the woman ye shall not
surely die for God doth know in the day
that you eat thereof then your eyes
shall be opened and you shall be as
God's knowing good and evil
sneaky subtle it's a nice story a the
first thing is for instance the instant
implication is well you can't trust God
so that's pretty sneaky and the next is
when he's trying to he's trying to pull
a fast one on you and the next one is
what he's trying to do that because he's
jealous and he doesn't want you to know
things that he knows because that would
be so good and he's lying to you anyways
because you're not going to die and if
you eat it contrary to what you've been
informed then all that's going to happen
is your eyes will be open and you'll be
like God's knowing good and evil that
sounds pretty damn good so you know a
night I mean Eve
but as she no and hold still wonder
she's susceptible to such blandishments
and it's quite interesting too because
out of and Eve God tells Adam and Eve
not to eat the damn fruit but they never
promise not to write so they haven't
promised they've just been told to and
well should they be obedient
well how obedient do you want your
children to be you want them to be
obedient enough so they don't get hurt
but disobedience enough so that they go
up in the world and do something
courageous and they break some rules
that they learn some things and so you
know it's it's it's a very paradoxical
story anyways the serpent one that wins
this round man and so Eve pays attention
to the snake so again we have the same
set of images right we have Adam and we
have Eve we have this tree and we have
this strange serpent that's a
dragon-like form they're a sphinx like
form that's associated with the tree the
snakes eternally associated with the
tree well the snake wasn't eternally
associated with the tree we spent god
only knows how many tens of millions of
years as tree dwelling primates and the
primary or one of our primary predators
we had three primary predators snakes
birds cats and so the snake has been
associated with the tree for a very very
long time and the lesson the snake tells
people is
you bloody well better wake up or
something you don't like will get you
and who's going to be more susceptible
susceptible to paying attention to the
snake and that's going to be Eve and the
reason for that is Eve has offspring and
there's nothing tastier to a snake than
a child and so Eve had every reason to
be self-conscious and neurotic and women
are more self-conscious and neurotic
than men by quite a substantial amount
and that's true cross culturally and it
emerges at puberty and part of the
reason is as far as we can tell is that
women are more sexually vulnerable
they're also smaller so that's a problem
if you're engaged in a physical
alteration but most importantly I think
is that why would you ever assume that a
human females nervous system is adapted
to her or her well-being why wouldn't
you assume instead that her nervous
system is adapted to the female infant
dyad because if it isn't then the
infant's die and so you might take well
women are way more susceptible to
depression and anxiety than men are
that's a hell of a burden to bear and
that's also true cross culturally by the
way and it also kicks in at puberty and
the biggest differences are in
Scandinavia for those of you who think
it's socio-cultural which isn't so but
there's reasons for it you know and it's
also at puberty when men and women start
to become sexually dimorphic in terms of
size and men are way more powerful in
their upper bodies it's incomparably
more powerful and so that makes them a
lot more dangerous and human human
primary human defense mechanism is
punching like with kangaroos for because
there's a mother animals the punch
chimps can punch too but human beings
it's a punch and most of the force and
that is upper-body and shoulder and so a
woman's no match for a man in a fight so
she has every reason to be nervous
especially when you add that to that her
additional sexual vulnerability and the
fact that she has to take care of
extraordinarily dependent infants who
are extremely fragile for a very long
period of time and so she had every and
women are more self-conscious than men
the empirical literature on that is
clear it's associated with trait
neuroticism because self-consciousness
is actually an unpleasant emotion who
wants to be self-conscious if I'm
self-conscious on the stage talking to
you then all of a sudden I can't even
talk to you all I'm doing is thinking
about me and all the things that are
wrong with me and I fall inside myself
it's like self-consciousness
although it's a great gift let's say is
nothing Pleasant its associated
primarily with anxiety so we've had
every reason to pay attention to the
snake that's for sure I think I read
this week that among can't remember
which tribes minute where it was
unfortunately although I did put a
footnote in my new book about this these
were jungled dwelling tribal people 5%
of the adults had been attacked by a
python and a substantial number of
children had been killed by them so
snake predation was no joke it shaped
our evolutionary past and still is no
joke in many places and so we're a tuned
to snakes and the thing is as lynn has
bel pointed out an anthropologist we are
really good at detecting the camouflage
patterns of snakes especially in the
lower half of our visual field and
there's evidence that part of the reason
that human beings have such a cute
vision which means that our eyes opened
let's say is because we were we Co
evolve with snakes and we learned how to
see them and then the price we paid for
seeing was that our brain grew because
you need a lot of brain to be able to
see and the consequence of our brain
growing is one day we woke up and
discovered the future and the future is
where all the snakes might live instead
of where they live right now so there's
that the same thing and the same so
interesting again these images you see
in this one you have the specter of
death in the tree with the snake and the
fruit no fruit is interesting - I
already made the case that there's a
tight linkage between what you eat and
information right a conceptual link as
well as a practical link but it's also
the case that we can see colors and the
question is why and the answer is
because we evolved to see ripe fruit so
in the story of Adam and Eve human
beings are given vision by the snake and
the fruit and that turns out to be
correct so isn't that something and then
you think what role do women play in
relationship to men well first they make
them self conscious let's not ever
forget about that because I would say
the primary role that women have in
relationship to manage to make them
self-conscious and men don't precisely
like that there's nothing that will make
a man more self-conscious than being
rejected and why because why is he
rejected
well obviously mother nature in the
guise of that particular woman have said
you're not so bad for a friend but
there's no reason that your genetic
material should propagate itself into
the future
right well it's not like men are exactly
happy about being me but made self
conscious by women right it's a major
source of continual tension between men
and women and it's no wonder but it's
also the case and this is something
really cool and interesting to know you
know we'd evolved dive divulge guy
whatever that's it diverged we diverged
from the common ancestor between us and
chimpanzees about six million years ago
here's why at least in part chimpanzee
females are non discriminant mater's
they'll mate with any male when they go
into heat which human females don't when
they go into heat then any male is
allowed access now the dominant males
chase the subordinate males away and so
the dominant males are more likely to
leave offspring but it's not because of
the female choice it's not the case with
human beings human females engage in
hypergamy and hypergamy is the ten this
is also to cross culturally and it's
also quite it's just as extensive in
Scandinavia not quite there's a bit of
attenuation but not much women mate
across and up dominance hierarchies
man-made across and down okay when that
has to be the case because if obviously
it has to work that way if one goes up
the other has to go down the
socio-economic status of a woman is
almost determines almost zero of her
attractiveness towards a man whereas the
socioeconomic status of a man is a major
determinant of his attractiveness
towards a woman and it isn't as wealth
either because that's been tested it's
his capacity to generate and be
productive and to share because that
beats the hell out of wealth wealth can
disappear right but the capacity to be
productive and share that's that's a
much more important element and why not
be chosen on the basis of that
especially because women have to have
infants and infants make the women
dependent and the woman is just looking
logically rationally and from an
evolutionary perspective for someone
who's useful enough to give a tool and a
hat so
women make intense demands on man and
it's no wonder but the thing is is that
because women engaged in hypergamy at
least in part we diverged quite rapidly
from chimpanzees because the selection
pressure that women placed on men
developed the entire species now there's
two things that happened as far as I
could tell the men competed for
competence let's say so the male
hierarchy is a mechanism that pushes the
best man to the top virtually by
definition and then that's that's the
effect of that is multiplied by the fact
that women who are a program must peel
from the top and so that the males who
are the most competent are much more
likely to leave offspring and that
seemed to be what drove our cortical
expansion for example which happened
very very rapidly over the course of
evolutionary time so and when the woman
saw that the tree was good for food and
it was pleasant to the eyes and a tree
to be desired to make one wise she took
of the fruit thereof and did eat and
gave also unto her husband with her and
he did eat
oh yes and women share food that's a
very strange thing because most
creatures don't do that right most
animals don't share food like if you if
you're a wolf and you bring down
something in a hunt you eat your fill
the dominant mate creatures eat their
fill and then if there's some left over
the subordinates get to eat too but that
isn't how human beings work we share
food now you can imagine how that
evolved because lots of female creatures
share food with their offspring okay you
don't need much of a twist in that from
an evolutionary perspective til you
start to share food not only with your
offspring se but with your mate and
that's another way that you entice a
mate it's like we're going to be better
together then alone well that's the
offering of the fruit well what's the
self conscious part well
here's part of the bargain you know I'm
going to wake you up and partly I'm
going to wake you up because you need to
be woken up because I have this infant
that needs some damn care so you bloody
well better be awake and part of the
bargain is all offer you something I'll
offer you some food and in response
we're going to make a team and that's
the deal on that's the human deal and
that's why we're more or less monogamous
by why we more or less pair bond and why
something approximating marriage is a
human Universal it's cross-cultural now
you can find exceptions but who the hell
cares
just really man who cares the Vic you
look at the vast pattern the vast
pattern well in the price we pay for
having large brains is that we're very
dependent and it takes a long time for
us to get programmed and because of that
we need relatively stable family bonding
and that's basically what we've evolved
and you know you don't get that without
making men self-conscious because male
creatures
why not impregnate and run I mean why
the hell not
and that's something to really no
kidding like that's the thing to think
about it is not why man abandoned their
children that's the mystery it's why any
men ever stick with them that's the
mystery because you just have to look at
the animal kingdom and that like the
simplest and easiest thing is always the
most likely thing to occur so it's the
exception that long-term commitment that
needs explanation she took of the fruit
thereof and did eat and gave also unto
her husband with her and he did eat and
the eyes of both of them were opened
implying that before that they were
closed and they knew they were naked and
they sewed fig leaves together and made
themselves aprons so that's so
interesting so their eyes are open which
indicates that they weren't to begin
with so whatever God created to begin
with was kind of blind Indian but not
blind in some strange way because they
weren't obviously wandering around in
the garden bumping into trees it was
some sort of metaphysical blindness
that's been removed by whatever has just
happened and whatever's just happened
also made them realize that they were
naked okay so what sort of eye opening
is that what does it mean to realize
that you're naked it means to realize
that you're vulnerable that's what
people discovered it's like oh we can be
hurt so you're a zebra in a herd of
zebras and there's a bunch of lions
around there
laying on the grass you don't care those
are laying down Lions laying down lions
are no problem it's standing up hunting
Lions that are the problem you're not
smart enough to figure out that laying
down lines turn into standing up hunting
Lions so you're not like building a fort
to keep the Lions out you're just
mindlessly eating grass you're not very
awake but that's not what happens to
human beings is they wake up and they
think we're vulnerable permanently it's
never going away
right it's the it's the recognition of
that eternal vulnerability
what happens the first thing they do is
clothe themselves well what happens when
you're naked when you need protection
from the world well obviously look
you're all wearing clothes you know why
well we've been doing that for a very
very long period of time it's tens of
thousands of years at minimum factor you
can track more or less when clothing
developed because you can do DNA testing
of the kind of lice that cling to
clothes rather than hair and so we have
a pretty good idea of when clothing
emerged and of different types as well
so that's quite cool but the point is
they're naked and they think that's not
so good we're vulnerable so their eyes
were open enough so they become
self-conscious and they recognize their
own vulnerability and the first thing
they do is the first step of culture is
to protect themselves with something
from the world and you protect yourself
from the world and from the prying eyes
of other people this is the book by
Linnaeus Bell why we see so well from
the temptation of the eve to the
venomous murder of the Mighty Thor the
serpent appears throughout time and
culture as a figure of mischief and
mystery misery the worldwide prominence
of snakes and religion myth and folklore
underscores our deep connection to the
serpent but why when so few of us have
first-hand experience the surprising
answer this book suggests lies in the
singular effect of snakes on primate
evolution predation pressure from snakes
líneas Bell tells us is ultimately
responsible for the superior vision and
large brains of primates and for a
critical aspect of human evolution that
was tested recently psychologists have
known for a long time that people are
can learn fear to snakes but they
discovered in primates recently a set of
neurons Palvin or neural neurons which
are specialized that that's an old old
perceptual systems reveal
neurobiological evidence of past
selection for rapid detections of snakes
so that's from 2013 so the snake
definitely woke us up color vision as an
adaptation to fruit eating in primates
it's not by accident that women make
themselves look like ripe fruit in order
to be attractive to men right and that's
also not socio-cultural in origin so and
they heard the voice of the Lord God
walking in the garden in the cool of the
day and Adam and his wife hid themselves
from the presence of the Lord
amongst the trees of the garden that's
interesting so what's the implication
prior to being woken up prior to
recognizing nakedness and vulnerability
there is no reason for God for men and
women to hide from God now are they
hiding from God while they're naked
they're vulnerable
ok so think about this think about this
it's like imagine that you have the
capacity to live truthfully and
courageously and forthrightly just
imagine that and then imagine why you
might not do that and then imagine how
about fear and shame how would that work
well let's say that the idea of living
forthrightly and truthfully and
courageously is analogous given what we
already know about these stories -
walking with God in the garden what
stops people from doing that what stops
people from hiding well it's their own
way it's a recognition of their own
inadequacy they look at themselves and I
think how in the world is a creature
since his I supposed to live properly in
this world with everything that's wrong
with me
and so what do you hide from well you
you go home you sit on your bed for five
minutes and ask yourself what have you
hidden from in your life man you'll have
books of knowledge reveal themselves to
you in your imagination right so well
why are you hiding well it's no bloody
wonder you're hiding it's no wonder that
people hide that's the thing that's so
terrifying about this story we woke up
and we thought oh my God look at this
place like this is seriously there's
some serious trouble here and we're in
some serious trouble and we're not what
we could be and so we hide and that's
what the story says people woke up they
became self-conscious they recognized
their own vulnerability and that made
them made them hide from manifesting
their divine destiny it's like yeah
that's exactly right and the Lord go
there I love this part of the story and
that's so funny and the Lord God called
and we could use a little humor at this
point and the Lord God called him to
Adam and said unto Him where art thou
and Adam said I heard thy voice in the
garden and I was afraid because I was
naked so in case there was any doubt
about that that's why and I hid myself
and God said who told you that you were
naked
did you eat of the tree where have I
commanded you that you should not eat
and this is where Adam shows himself in
all his post-fall heroic glory and the
man said the woman whom thou gave us to
be with me she gave me of the tree and I
did eat so that's that heard man that's
such that it's so you know again there's
a modern feminist interpretation of the
story of Adam and Eve that makes the
claim that Eve was portrayed as the
universal bad guy of humanity for
disobeying God and eating the Apple it's
like fair enough you know looks like she
slipped up and then she tempted her
husband and you know that makes her even
worse although he's was foolish enough
to immediately eat so it just means she
was a little more courageous than him
then got there first
but it's Adam who comes across as really
one sad creature in this story as far as
I'm concerned well c'mon he manages in
one sentence it's like first of all it
wasn't him it was the woman and since it
even blames God more than just the woman
it was that woman and you gave her to me
and she gave me of the tree and I did
eat it's like so hey Adams all innocent
except now he's not only is he naked and
disobedient and cowardly and ashamed
he's also snively backbiting
think he wraps her out like the sick and
he gets the opportunity and then he
blames God it's like and that's exactly
right
that's exactly right man you go online
and you read you read the commentary
that men write about women when they're
resentful and bitter about women you
read it it's so interesting it's like
it's not me it's those bitches okay
that's right it's not me it's them and
not only that what a bloody world this
is in which they exist
it's exactly the same thing it's exactly
the same thing and it is absolutely
pathetic all right and the Lord God said
unto the woman what is this that thou
has done and the woman said the serpent
beguiled me and I did eat well he she
has a bloody excuse first of all it's a
snake I mean those things are we already
found out there's subtle and second it
turns out that the damn snake is Satan
himself you know and he's rather
treacherous so the fact that she got
tangled up in his mess let's say is well
problematic but it's a hell of a lot
better excuse that Adam has and the Lord
God says unto the serpent because thou
has done done this thou art cursed above
all cattle and above every beast of the
field upon thy belly shalt thou go and
dust shalt thou eat all the days of my
life and snakes by the way are lizards
that lost their legs just so you know
and I will put enmity between thee and
the woman and between thy seed and her
seed it shall bruise thy head and thou
shalt bruise his heel I love these
pictures they're so smart and again
strip the religious context from them
and just look at them for a second what
do you see you see the eternal mother
holding her infant away from the snake
see it down there right
crocodile snake everything predatory
that's been after us for like 60 million
years the reason we're here is because
of that that's why it's a sacred image
you know this one I like even better see
down there there's something like the
moon and then there's a reptile down
there that Eve is standing on this is
really old and I showed you this before
but I think it's so cool
she's coming out of this thing that's
like a hole in the sky you know because
it indicates the eternal re presence of
this figure it's something like that the
eternal recurrence of this figure it's
an archetype but then the potential out
of which she is emerging these are all
musical instruments back here
and so what the artist is representing
is the great patterns complexity of
being and the emergence of the
protective mother from that background
protecting the infant eternally against
predation it's like how can I not be a
holy image if it isn't the holy image if
you don't think it's a holy image then
there isn't something wrong with the
image there's something wrong with the
perceiver until the woman he said well
God's just outlining the consequences of
this right now it's like okay well now
you've gone and done it you've woken up
this is what's going to happen
I'll greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception in sorrow thou shalt bring
forth children and thy desire shall be
to thy husband and he shall rule over
thee to say he should says he will why
in sorrow shalt thou bring forth
children well when you develop a brain
that big so that you can see it's not
that easy to give birth anymore and then
you produce something that's dependent
the own belief and that's one of the
things that you would say dooms you to
precisely this so--that's ease
punishment for waking up and Adam
because thou has hearkened unto the
voice of thy wife and his eaten of the
tree of which I commanded thee saying
thou shalt not eat it cursed is the
ground for thy sake in sorrow shalt thou
eat of it in all the days of thy life
what's that the invention of work thorns
and thistles shall it bring forth to
thee and thou shalt eat the herb of the
field
it's the invention of work what do
people do that animals don't work what
does work mean means you've sacrificed
the present for the future why do you do
that because you know you're vulnerable
because you're awake and so from here on
in from this point there's no return to
unconscious paradise I don't care how
many problems you've solved so that
today is okay you've got a lot of
problems coming up and no bloody matter
how much you work you're never going to
work enough to solve them and so all
you're going to do from here on in is be
terrified of the future and that's the
price of waking up and that's the end of
paradise and that's the beginning of
history and that's how that story goes
in the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat
bread till thou return unto the ground
for out of it was though taken for dust
thou art and unto dust thou shalt return
and Adam called his wife's name Eve
because she was the mother of all living
unto Adam also and unto his wife did the
Lord God make coats of skin and clothed
them that's William Blake by the way and
the Lord God said Behold the man has
become as one of us to know good and
evil and now lest he put forth his hand
and take also of the tree of life and
eat and live forever I'll go over this
again next week
therefore the Guillard God sent him from
the forth forth from the Garden of Eden
to till the ground from whence he was
taken so he drove out the man and he
placed at the east of the Garden of Eden
cherubims and a flaming sword which
turned every way to keep the way of the
Tree of Life
one more thing and then we'll stop so I
thought why in the world so Adam and Eve
are tempted by the snake they eat the
fruit they wake up they realize they're
naked they realize that they're
vulnerable they realize the future they
realize they're going to die they
realize that they have to work it
accounts for difficulty in conception
and the fall of humankind from
unconscious paradise okay that makes
sense
what about the knowledge of good and
evil what in the world does that mean
the Mesopotamians believed that human
beings were made out of the blood of
King knew who was the worst monster the
time out who was the goddess of chaos
could imagine and then produce so their
idea was that whatever was about
humanity there was something deeply
deeply deeply demonically flawed so
that's their conception and then some of
that same milieu that these stories
emerge so what is opening your eyes and
realizing your vulnerability have to do
with the knowledge of good and evil
really I thought about that I really
thought about that I got to tell you I
thought about that for like 20 years
because I knew there was something there
that I could not put together and at the
same time I was I was reading things I'm
going to tell you something truly awful
and so if you need a trigger warning
you're you're getting one and believe me
I do not give trigger warnings lightly
so I'm going to tell you something you
will never forget so this is what unit
731 used to do in China and China said
Japanese unit during the first second
world war right as far as I can tell
they did the most horrific things that
we're done to anyone during World War
two and that's really something so this
is what they did they took their
prisoners and they would put them in a
position so that their arms would freeze
solid and then they would take them
outside and pour hot water over their
arms and then it would repeat that till
the flesh came off the bones and they
were doing that to investigate the
treatment of frostbite for soldiers you
can look up unit 731 if you want to have
nightmares
so that's a unit 731 that's human-beings
someone thought that up and then people
did it that's knowledge of good and evil
here's the here's the key man you know
you're vulnerable no other animal knows
that you know what hurts you because
you're vulnerable now that you know what
hurts you you can figure out what hurts
someone else and as soon as you know
what hurts someone else and you can use
that you have the knowledge of good and
evil well it's a pretty good trick that
the snake code because it doesn't look
like it's exactly the sort of thing that
we might have wanted if we would have
known what the consequence was but as
soon as a human being is self conscious
and aware of his own nakedness then he
has the capacity for evil and that is
that's introduced into the world right
at that point and here's the rest of the
story so there's the snake right and
you're some tree dwelling primate and
the snake eats you and that sucks so
that's like let's watch out for the damn
snakes and then you think well wait a
minute your brain grows and think wait a
minute well there's not just snake
there's where snakes live why don't we
just get the hell out of the tree and go
hunt down the snakes and get rid of them
so those are sort of like potential
snakes and so the snake becomes
potential snake and it's the same
circuit that you're using to do this
thinking and then you get rid of the
damn snakes
it's like st. Patrick chases the mug of
Ireland no more snakes
everything's paradise it's like no no no
that's not that's not how it works no
well now you've got the human snakes
you're a tribe you've got tribal enemies
you got to defend yourself against the
human snakes right so maybe your empire
expands and you get rid of all the human
snakes and then what happens well they
start to grow developed inside it's like
you get rid of all the external enemies
and you make a big city and all of a
sudden there's enemies that pop up
inside because the snake isn't just the
snake in the garden and the snake isn't
just the possible snake and the snake
isn't just the snake that's your enemy
the snake is your friend right because
your friend can betray you and then it's
even worse than that because you can
betray you and so even if you get rid of
all the outside snakes you've got an
inside snake and god only knows what
it's up to
and that's why the bloody Christians
associated the snake in the Garden of
Eden with Satan it's unbelievably
brilliant because you got to think
what's the enemy well it's the snake
fair enough but you know that's good if
you're a tree dwelling primate but if
you're a sophisticated human being you
know with six million years of that
additional evolution and you're really
trying to solve the problem of what it
is that's the great enemy of mankind
well it's the human propensity for evil
right as such well that's the figure of
Satan that's what that figure means just
like there's a logos that's the truth
that speaks order out of chaos at the
beginning of time there's an
antithetical spirit the hostile brother
that's Cain - Abel which we'll talk to
talk about next week that's doing
exactly the opposite it's motivated by
absolutely nothing but malevolence and
the willingness to destroy and it has
every reason for doing so and that's
what's revealed in the next story in
Cain and Abel in one paragraph the first
glimmerings of that outside of the
strange insistence by the Christian
mystics let's say on the identity
between the snake in the Garden of Eden
and the author of all evil himself
[Applause]
okay so we only have 15 minutes today I
I wanted to finish that so apologies for
going over a little longer all right hi
dr. Peterson over the last couple weeks
and further back you talked a lot about
consciousness and the importance of it I
was hoping to get your opinion on an
issue of consciousness that has often
seen Christianity among other groups and
politics kind of clashed so I'm hoping
to get your views on any consciousness
or lack thereof of a human fetus and how
that impact or even bortion whatever
they are and any legislation
thank you thank you okay so the first
question is do I have an answer for that
that's a good enough answer to actually
reveal I know I don't but I can flail
about a little bit around it abortion is
clearly wrong I don't think anybody
debates that you wouldn't recommend that
someone that you love have one
okay now having clarified that that mere
statement doesn't eliminate the
complexity of the situation the first
question is is should everything wrong
be illegal that's a tough question
everything that's wrong isn't illegal
then there's the additional complication
of the difference let's say in gravity
regarding the problem in relationship to
men and women and we don't know how to
deal with that having said that I would
say that it's actually the wrong
question there's a something Leonard
Cohen said once he said that in a
massacre there's no decent place to
stand
and what he meant by that was sometimes
you're where there is no good decision
left no matter what you do it's wrong so
then the question is how did you get
there well let's say you're in a
position where you are inclined to seek
an abortion the question is how did you
get there
now we have a lot to straighten out
about the sexual relationships between
men and women in the modern world
they're bent and warped and demented out
of shape one of the things I see with
young people for example is that they
will engage in sexual acts with one
another that they would not talk about
with one another I mean couples will do
that for that matter like married
couples will do that but they're married
that's that's a different story
it seems to me that if you are willing
to engage in a sexual act with someone
with whom you would not discuss that act
you probably put the cart before the
horse so the discussion regarding the
legality of abortion is nested inside a
larger discussion about the morality of
abortion and that's disconnected inside
a larger discussion about the proper
place of sexuality and human behavior
and to me that's the level at which the
problem needs to be addressed now I
don't have the answer to that you know
because the old answer was get married
that was a good answer and it's an
answer that people should still listen
to but we'll put that aside momentarily
I had a client at one point who was I
don't know she was probably I'm not I'm
going to disguise her in a variety of
different ways she was 27 2008 come from
a relatively conservative background
quite a timid fearful person and also
not very well not sophisticated in
relationship to relationships and she
never had sex what was a bunch of things
she'd never done well the answer from me
to her wasn't continued to be timid
about everything because that wasn't
working out for her she needed to go
have some adventures
now sexual adventures like other
adventures are dangerous and so you have
to be very careful when you encourage
people to go out and have adventures but
but but too much timidity and caution
also constitutes a pathway to perdition
let's say you can't just say to people
in the modern world well you know sex
till you're married unless you're going
to get married when you're very young
and perhaps you should I don't know
about that but I don't think that we're
mature enough as a culture to have a
serious discussion about sexual
propriety especially in the aftermath of
the birth control pill and we seriously
need to do that and we have it and so I
think the eternal debate about abortion
horrible as it is is a it's the surface
manifestation of a much deeper problem
now I talked a little bit today about
the utility of marriage like the
spiritual utility of marriage and that's
something that I think we're so
immaturely cynical as a culture like we
don't we're not wise enough to look at
an institution like marriage and to
really think about what it means and
what it signifies it signifies a place
that people could tie the ropes of their
lives together so that they're stronger
it signifies a place where people can
tell the truth to one another
it signifies a place where sexuality can
properly be integrated into life that's
no easy that's an easy task it's a place
where children at least in principle can
be put first and foremost as they should
be once they exist and so there's a much
broader discussion that has to happen I
think before any concentration on the
legality of abortion is liable to get
anywhere at all that's what it looks
like to me so that's the best I can do
with that question
hi dr. Peterson earlier you showed a
picture of Foxy and Noah yeah right uh
and and Osiris and in your maps of
meaning life yeah you also explained
that cultures around the world have
these twin snakes yeah they're
everywhere man yeah and so you mentioned
that you believe this is a
representation of DNA you would bring
that up to Jesus what is it with you
guys tonight huh yeah well yeah no I
wouldn't say I believe that I have my
suspicions that that might be it yeah
because believe is too strong a word but
those representations are everywhere and
read this book this is a good one oh man
now I have to remember the book by an
anthropologist who went down to the
Amazon jungle and experimented
intensively with ayahuasca I think it's
called the cosmic serpent I think that's
the name of the book you could read that
there's another one called breaking open
the head which is also pretty damn
interesting and there's something to
those books
I mean the cosmic serpent kind of goes
off on a bit of a tangent I would say
although breaking open the head is it's
better better it seems to stay more
constrained and tight but there's we
don't know the limits of our perception
especially under certain conditions and
I think people have had intimations of
DNA as the cosmic serpent forever so
yeah but that's a like that's way out on
the frontiers of my knowledge right like
I'm guessing in a dreamlike way when I'm
making statements like that so because
he didn't mention that you did believe
in and that there were sort of maybe
some some dreams and interpretations
that might have emerged but I don't see
how we could perceive DNA as it is right
well yes we did we didn't objectively
but I'm not so sure we didn't
subjectively
but it means very strange that these did
these double helixes exist in so many
places and that they're often utilized
as healing symbols with the snake so
anyways like I said that's what do you
call that
I'm it's not hypothesizing it's one
thing worse than that speculating those
are speculations I'm I'm operating at
the edge of my understanding but our
perceptions can are very mutable and
they can we can see things under some
conditions that you wouldn't think that
anybody could see so okay yep
so I was just starting to have a thought
while you're talking about sort of
getting to the end of the talk about the
snake and the Apple and so on so what
you're saying is the moment that that
that Adam and Eve eat the Apple they
become nervous or whatever so that's
awareness of their own vulnerability so
then like you said it's also awareness
of their own capacity to do harm so it's
like when they are eating the Apple then
that's them their immediate sort of
nervous reaction is is because they ate
the Apple and they kind of became evil
in that moment or something like that
well they woke up and because they they
woke up and realized how they could be
hurt how they could and would be hurt
over the over the over the upcoming
overtime it's the same as the discovery
of the discovery of your own nakedness
and the discovery of time are very very
similar phenomena
I mean sure as soon as you know how you
can be hurt well you know if you are to
just consult your evil fantasies it's
like what'll really hurt him oh yeah
that would work it's like how do you
know that well you just think about it
what would happen if that happened to me
that would hurt oh yeah that'll work
it'll hurt him or her and you know you
probably think that way twice a week or
maybe twice a day Jesus every time you
have an argument with someone all you
have to do is look at the back of your
mind a little bit you don't want to
that's for sure but if you do you'll see
these sorts of thought process is
generating constantly it's like you know
in a back-and-forth discussion
particularly with people you love it's
like you're always looking for a place
to put the knife in so
it seems really similar to me or seems
like they're kind of discovering the
kind of like Union shadow within
themselves so that that is the moment
where it got introduced into the human
spirit sure one of the things about the
shadow is that it's also when you
integrate that that's what makes you a
substantial person right oh it's like it
seems to me that on one hand well it
seems like this tragedy that's Satan the
most evil the father of evil whatever
has introduced into people but it also
seems like without that shadow that
people are kind of insubstantial
so yeah well right right I mean like I
said I said that there's been a
multitude of interpretations emerge as a
consequence of that story what was God
up to what was God in fact evil the
initial God like why would he create a
snake why would he put it in the garden
why would there be these trees what the
hell is going on with the whole Satan
thing you know it's very very
problematic well we'll talk about it
more and then this again is let's call
it speculation well if you want to make
something strong you test it and maybe
if you want to make something ultimately
strong you test it ultimately and I
think that there's an aspect of being
that has that element is that human
beings are tempted ultimately it's
partly because we know good and good and
evil now and so that's the landscape in
which we exist so you could say the
landscape is across its chaos and order
and it's good and evil and we're stuck
in the middle between those two things
it's a very common theme by the way in
videogames exactly that chaos order good
evil it's the it's the basic plot of
endless video games and that's perhaps
because it's the basic plot those are
the things we have to contend with well
I had a vision once shouldn't tell you
this but I will anyways I had a vision
once that I went to heaven and I was put
in a in a Roman amphitheater with Satan
just like Thor encountering the Hulk
right that's coming up in that New
Avengers movie
so it was rather a shock because I
thought there was a hell of a thing to
happen in heaven and so I had this
battle and I won and at the end I came
up to God and said like you know what's
with the whole Roman amphitheater thing
there it seemed like it over the top to
me said why would you put me in a ring
with some one thing like that and he
said because I knew you could win and
you know I don't know what to make of
that
haha one thing I should teach you to
make of it as I shouldn't tell you but
whatever but you know there's something
there's something to that in my
estimation it's like do you protect the
people you love or do you try to make
them strong so you think it's that it's
not that we have like Satan to thank for
making us substantial it's that God gave
us Satan in order to make us substantial
well I'd hesitate to say that because
you know it's so cut and dried but I
would say that that there's this that's
a strong underlying theme in the
biblical narrative yes now it's
certainly not the only theme it's not
the only interpretation by any stretch
of the imagination but there is
something there and there's something
there you know at the end we didn't talk
about this God puts up his flaming sword
and these cherubim to keep you away from
the tree of life it's like it's see if
paradise and immortality are the
promised land and what's with the whole
flaming angel and sword thing we could
have just had the damn fruit five
thousand years ago and not bothered with
the problem well it seems to me that
there's something like I don't know what
it is consciousness through tragedy
clarity through suffering maybe
something like that or maybe the
perfection that lurks as a potential in
the future is something that has to be
earned rather than given maybe it has no
value without free choice maybe we have
to distinguish between good and evil now
that we have the capacity to actually
apprehend them maybe that's what life is
about
maybe that's the separating of the wheat
from the chaff see that's the idea in
Revelation right because when Christ
comes back in the book of Revelation he
divides the Damned from the saved
and the saved are the people who lived
in logos roughly speaking and the Damned
or those who don't and so there's this
idea that there's this dynamic that
underlies experience that is in fact
that sorting now I don't know what to
make of that
at all but that's the story but what I
can make of that is that I I can't put a
lever underneath the argument that I
just made tonight about the relationship
between the development of vision the
snake of fruit
nakedness time the future work and most
importantly the emergence of evil that
seems to me to be I cannot find a way to
undermine that argument it seems I can't
break it and that's what I'm always
looking for when I'm trying to formulate
ideas I'm trying to look for something
that no matter how hard I try I cannot
break and I can't break that set of
ideas now what the full implication is
of that set of ideas god only knows
right but but I could say also
practically you know one of the things
that I've observed is that lies and
deception destroy people's lives and
when they start telling the truth and
acting it out things get a lot better
gotta stop